 
CONSTITUTION ACT 1902
 
 
- As at 24 February 2014
 
- Act 32 of 1902
 
 
 
 
 

TABLE OF PROVISIONS
 


TABLE OF PROVISIONS

PART 1 - PRELIMINARY
1. Name of Act

2. Recognition of Aboriginal people

3. Definitions

4. Application of Act

PART 2 - POWERS OF THE LEGISLATURE
5. General legislative powers

5A. Disagreement between the two Houses—appropriation for annual services

5B. Disagreements—referendum

5C. Words of enactment

6. (Repealed)

7. Power to alter constitution of Legislative Council or Legislative Assembly

7A. Referendum for Bills with respect to Legislative Council and certain other
matters

7B. Referendum for Bills with respect to Legislative Assembly and certain other
matters

8. (Repealed)

8A. Assent to Bills

PART 2A - THE GOVERNOR
9. Meaning of “unavailable”

9A. Appointment of Governor

9B. Appointment of Lieutenant-Governor and Administrator

9C. Administration of government by Lieutenant-Governor or Administrator

9D. Deputy for Governor during short illness or absence

9E. Oaths or Affirmations of Allegiance and of Office

9F. Letters Patent and Instructions cease to have effect

9G. Continuation of existing Commissions, appointments etc

9H. Public Seal of the State

9I. Governor’s salary

PART 3 - THE LEGISLATIVE COUNCIL AND LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY
Division 1 - General provisions
10. Time and place for holding sessions of Parliament

10A. Prorogation of Parliament

11. One session of Parliament to be held in each year

11A. Elections to be held pursuant to writs

11B. Compulsory voting

12. No Member to sit or vote until pledge of loyalty or oath of allegiance
taken

13. Disqualifications

13A. Further disqualifications

13B. Office of profit or pension from Crown

13C. Member of one House ineligible for other

13D. Abatement of salary of Members receiving pension or superannuation as
public servants

14. Summons or election of disqualified persons

14A. Disclosure of pecuniary interests and other matters by Members

15. Standing Rules and Orders to be laid before Governor

Division 2 - Special provisions relating to the Legislative Council
16. Definitions

17. Reconstitution of the Legislative Council

17A–21. (Repealed)

22. Eligibility to vote at periodic Council elections

22A. Conduct of periodic Council elections

22B. Term of service of Members of Legislative Council

22C. (Repealed)

22D. Filling of casual vacancies in seats of Members of Legislative Council by
joint sitting of both Houses

22E. Members elected at joint sittings of both Houses of Parliament

22F. Suspension of Legislative Council business for general election of the
Legislative Assembly

22G. President

22H. Quorum

22I. Determination of questions

22J. Resignation of seats in the Legislative Council

Division 3 - Special provisions relating to the Legislative Assembly
23. Convocation of Assembly

24. Duration of Assembly

24A. Date of general election for Legislative Assembly

24B. Dissolution of Legislative Assembly during 4 year term

25. Number of Members of Legislative Assembly

26. Single Member electorates

27. Distribution of New South Wales into electoral districts

28. Number of voters in electoral districts

28A. Special distribution to maintain equal number of voters in each electoral
district

29. Conduct of Legislative Assembly elections

30. Assembly may proceed to business although writs not exceeding five shall
not have been returned

31. Speaker

31A. Absence of Speaker from New South Wales

31B. Manner of election of Speaker

32. Quorum and determination of questions

33. Resignation of seats in the Assembly

34. (Repealed)

PART 4 - THE EXECUTIVE
Division 1 - Preliminary
35. Definitions

35A. Preservation of certain conventions etc relating to advice to Governor

Division 2 - The Executive Council
35B. Continuation of Executive Council

35C. Members of the Executive Council

35CA. Executive Councillor’s pledge of loyalty or oath of allegiance and oath
of office

35D. Meetings of the Executive Council

Division 3 - Appointment of Ministers of the Crown
35E. Appointment of Ministers

35F. (Repealed)

Division 4 - Functions of Ministers of the Crown
36. Authority for Minister of the Crown to act for and on behalf of another
Minister of the Crown

37. Unavailability of Minister of the Crown

37A. Provisions ancillary to sections 36 and 37

38. Limitation as to exercise of Attorney-General’s functions

38A. Powers of Ministers to speak in Legislative Council

PART 4A - PARLIAMENTARY SECRETARIES
38B. Appointment of Parliamentary Secretaries

38C. Functions of Parliamentary Secretary

38D. How Parliamentary Secretary ceases to hold office

38E. Restrictions relating to Parliamentary Secretaries

PART 5 - THE CONSOLIDATED FUND
39. Consolidated Fund

40. Expenses of collection

41–44. (Repealed)

45. Appropriation of Consolidated Fund

46. Money Bills to be recommended by Governor

PART 6 - OFFICERS AND STAFF
47. Appointment of officers

47A. Employment of staff

48. Absent officers and staff

49. (Repealed)

49A. Demise of the Crown

PART 7 - ADMINISTRATIVE ARRANGEMENTS
50. (Repealed)

50A. Definitions: Part 7

50B. Allocation of administration of Acts and other portfolio responsibilities

50C. Ministers to whom Public Service agencies responsible

50D. Public Service agencies—creation, abolition and changes

50E. Change to references in Acts etc to Ministers, Public Service agencies and
Public Service employees

50F. Provisions consequent on administrative changes and other matters

50G. Publication, commencement and operation of orders

PART 8 - LOCAL GOVERNMENT
51. Local government

PART 9 - THE JUDICIARY
52. Definition and application

53. Removal from judicial office

54. Suspension from judicial office

55. Retirement

56. Abolition of judicial office


First–Fifth Schedules - (Repealed)

SCHEDULE 6
SCHEDULE 7

 

CONSTITUTION ACT 1902
- LONG TITLE
 
 
An Act to consolidate the Acts relating to the Constitution.
 

CONSTITUTION ACT 1902
- SECT 1
Name of Act
 
 
1 Name of Act
This Act may be cited as the Constitution Act 1902.
 

CONSTITUTION ACT 1902
- SECT 2
Recognition of Aboriginal people
 
 
2 Recognition of Aboriginal people
     (1) Parliament, on behalf of the people of New South Wales,
     acknowledges and honours the Aboriginal people as the State’s first
     people and nations.
     (2) Parliament, on behalf of the people of New South Wales,
     recognises that Aboriginal people, as the traditional custodians and
     occupants of the land in New South Wales:
          (a) have a spiritual, social, cultural and economic
          relationship with their traditional lands and waters, and
          (b) have made and continue to make a unique and lasting
          contribution to the identity of the State.
     (3) Nothing in this section creates any legal right or liability, or
     gives rise to or affects any civil cause of action or right to review
     an administrative action, or affects the interpretation of any Act or
     law in force in New South Wales.
 

CONSTITUTION ACT 1902
- SECT 3
Definitions
 
 
3 Definitions
In this Act, unless the context or subject-matter otherwise indicates or
requires:
>"Periodic Council election" means an election held for the return of 21
Members of the Legislative Council.
>"The Legislature" means His Majesty the King with the advice and consent of
the Legislative Council and Legislative Assembly.
 

CONSTITUTION ACT 1902
- SECT 4
Application of Act
 
 
4 Application of Act
For the purposes of this Act, the boundaries of New South Wales shall comprise
all that portion of Australia lying between the one hundred and twenty-ninth
and one hundred and fifty-fourth degrees of east longitude, reckoning from the
meridian of Greenwich and northward of the fortieth degree of south latitude,
including all the islands adjacent in the Pacific Ocean within the latitude
aforesaid, and also including Lord Howe Island, save and except the territories
comprised within the boundaries of South Australia, Victoria, and Queensland,
as at present established.
     Note: For the boundary between NSW and Victoria see the proclamation
     published in Gazette No 22 of 15.2.2006, p 825.
 

CONSTITUTION ACT 1902
- SECT 5
General legislative powers
 
 
5 General legislative powers
The Legislature shall, subject to the provisions of the Commonwealth of
Australia Constitution Act, have power to make laws for the peace, welfare, and
good government of New South Wales in all cases whatsoever:
Provided that all Bills for appropriating any part of the public revenue, or
for imposing any new rate, tax or impost, shall originate in the Legislative
Assembly.
 

CONSTITUTION ACT 1902
- SECT 5A
Disagreement between the two Houses—appropriation for annual services
 
 
5A Disagreement between the two Houses—appropriation for annual services
     (1) If the Legislative Assembly passes any Bill appropriating revenue
     or moneys for the ordinary annual services of the Government and the
     Legislative Council rejects or fails to pass it or returns the Bill
     to the Legislative Assembly with a message suggesting any amendment
     to which the Legislative Assembly does not agree, the Legislative
     Assembly may direct that the Bill with or without any amendment
     suggested by the Legislative Council, be presented to the Governor
     for the signification of His Majesty’s pleasure thereon, and shall
     become an Act of the Legislature upon the Royal Assent being
     signified thereto, notwithstanding that the Legislative Council has
     not consented to the Bill.
     (2) The Legislative Council shall be taken to have failed to pass any
     such Bill, if the Bill is not returned to the Legislative Assembly
     within one month after its transmission to the Legislative Council
     and the Session continues during such period.
     (3) If a Bill which appropriates revenue or moneys for the ordinary
     annual services of the Government becomes an Act under the provisions
     of this section, any provision in such Act dealing with any matter
     other than such appropriation shall be of no effect.
 

CONSTITUTION ACT 1902
- SECT 5B
Disagreements—referendum
 
 
5B Disagreements—referendum
     (1) If the Legislative Assembly passes any Bill other than a Bill to
     which section 5A applies, and the Legislative Council rejects or
     fails to pass it or passes it with any amendment to which the
     Legislative Assembly does not agree, and if after an interval of
     three months the Legislative Assembly in the same Session or in the
     next Session again passes the Bill with or without any amendment
     which has been made or agreed to by the Legislative Council, and the
     Legislative Council rejects or fails to pass it or passes it with any
     amendment to which the Legislative Assembly does not agree, and if
     after a free conference between managers there is not agreement
     between the Legislative Council and the Legislative Assembly, the
     Governor may convene a joint sitting of the Members of the
     Legislative Council and the Members of the Legislative Assembly.
     The Members present at the joint sitting may deliberate upon the Bill
     as last proposed by the Legislative Assembly and upon any amendments
     made by the Legislative Council with which the Legislative Assembly
     does not agree.
     No vote shall be taken at the joint sitting.
     (2) After the joint sitting and either after any further
     communication with the Legislative Council in order to bring about
     agreement, if possible, between the Legislative Council and the
     Legislative Assembly, or without any such communication the
     Legislative Assembly may by resolution direct that the Bill as last
     proposed by the Legislative Assembly and either with or without any
     amendment subsequently agreed to by the Legislative Council and the
     Legislative Assembly, shall, at any time during the life of the
     Parliament or at the next general election of Members of the
     Legislative Assembly, be submitted by way of referendum to the
     electors qualified to vote for the election of Members of the
     Legislative Assembly.
     The referendum shall be held and conducted, if the Constitution
     Further Amendment (Referendum) Act 1930 or any other Act relating to
     the manner in which the referendum shall be held and conducted is in
     force, in accordance with that Act or with any other such Act, but if
     that Act is not in force and no such other Act is in force the law
     for the time being in force relating to the holding and conduct of a
     general election of Members of the Legislative Assembly shall,
     mutatis mutandis, apply to and in respect of the holding and conduct
     of the referendum, with such modifications, omissions, and additions
     as the Governor may by notification published in the Gazette declare
     to be necessary or convenient for the purposes of such application.
     (3) If at the referendum a majority of the electors voting approve
     the Bill it shall be presented to the Governor for the signification
     of His Majesty’s pleasure thereon and become an Act of the
     Legislature upon the Royal Assent being signified thereto,
     notwithstanding that the Legislative Council has not consented to the
     Bill.
     (4) For the purposes of this section the Legislative Council shall be
     taken to have failed to pass a Bill if the Bill is not returned to
     the Legislative Assembly within two months after its transmission to
     the Legislative Council and the Session continues during such period.
     (5) This section shall extend to any Bill whether it is a Bill to
     which section 7A applies or not.
     And in the application of this section to a Bill to which section 7A
     applies:
          (a) the submission of the Bill to the electors by way of
          referendum in accordance with this section shall be a
          sufficient compliance with the provisions of section 7A
          which require the Bill to be submitted to the electors,
          (b) the referendum under this section shall,
          notwithstanding anything contained in section 7A, be held
          upon a day which shall be appointed by the Governor, and
          (c) the day so appointed shall, notwithstanding anything
          contained in subsection (2), be a day during the life of
          the Parliament and not sooner than two months after the
          Legislative Assembly has passed a resolution in accordance
          with that subsection for the purposes of such referendum.
     (6) A joint sitting of the Members of the Legislative Council and the
     Members of the Legislative Assembly for the purposes of this section
     may be convened by the Governor by message to both Houses of the
     Parliament.
     At such joint sitting the President of the Legislative Council or in
     his absence the Speaker of the Legislative Assembly shall preside,
     and until standing rules and orders governing the procedure at joint
     sittings have been passed by both Houses and approved by the
     Governor, the Standing Rules and Orders of the Legislative Council
     shall so far as practicable apply.
 

CONSTITUTION ACT 1902
- SECT 5C
Words of enactment
 
 
5C Words of enactment
     (1) Where a Bill is presented to the Governor for the signification
     of His Majesty’s pleasure in accordance with section 5A, the words
     of enactment shall be as follows:
          BE it enacted by the King’s Most Excellent Majesty, by
          and with the advice and consent of the Legislative Assembly
          of New South Wales in Parliament assembled, in accordance
          with the provisions of section 5A of the Constitution Act
          1902, as amended by subsequent Acts, and by the authority
          of the same, as follows:
     Any alteration of a Bill necessary to give effect to this subsection
     shall not be deemed to be an amendment of the Bill.
     (2) Where a Bill is presented to the Governor for the signification
     of His Majesty’s pleasure in accordance with section 5B, the words
     of enactment shall be as follows:
          BE it enacted by the King’s Most Excellent Majesty, by
          and with the advice and consent of the Legislative Assembly
          of New South Wales in Parliament assembled, with the
          approval of the electors, in accordance with the provisions
          of section 5B of the Constitution Act 1902, as amended by
          subsequent Acts, and by the authority of the same, as
          follows:
     Any alteration of a Bill necessary to give effect to this subsection
     shall not be deemed to be an amendment of the Bill.
 

CONSTITUTION ACT 1902
- SECT 7
Power to alter constitution of Legislative Council or Legislative Assembly
 
 
7 Power to alter constitution of Legislative Council or Legislative Assembly
The Legislature may, by any Act, alter the laws in force for the time being
under this Act or otherwise concerning the Legislative Council or Legislative
Assembly.
 

CONSTITUTION ACT 1902
- SECT 7A
Referendum for Bills with respect to Legislative Council and certain other
matters
 
 
7A Referendum for Bills with respect to Legislative Council and certain other
matters
     (1) The Legislative Council shall not be abolished or dissolved, nor
     shall:
          (a) its powers be altered,
          (b) section 11A, Division 2 of Part 3 (sections 22G, 22H,
          22I and 22J excepted), the Sixth Schedule or this section
          be expressly or impliedly repealed or amended,
          (c) any provision with respect to the persons capable of
          being elected or of sitting and voting as Members of either
          House of Parliament be enacted, or
          (d) any provision with respect to the circumstances in
          which the seat of a Member of either House of Parliament
          becomes vacant be enacted,
     except in the manner provided by this section.
     (2) A Bill for any purpose within subsection (1) shall not be
     presented to the Governor for His Majesty’s assent until the Bill
     has been approved by the electors in accordance with this section.
     (3) On a day not sooner than two months after the passage of the Bill
     through both Houses of the Legislature the Bill shall be submitted to
     the electors qualified to vote for the election of Members of the
     Legislative Assembly.
     Such day shall be appointed by the Legislature.
     (4) When the Bill is submitted to the electors the vote shall be
     taken in such manner as the Legislature prescribes.
     (5) If a majority of the electors voting approve the Bill, it shall
     be presented to the Governor for His Majesty’s assent.
     (6) The provisions of this section do not apply to:
          (a) a Bill for the repeal, the amendment from time to time
          or the re-enactment from time to time with or without
          modifications of:
               (i) any of the provisions of section 15 or 38A,
               or
               (ii) any provision for the time being in force so
               far as it relates to the subject-matter dealt
               with in any of the provisions referred to in
               subparagraph (i),
          (b) a provision of a Bill, being a provision which would,
          upon its coming into operation, be a law referred to in
          section 22A (5),
          (c) a provision of a Bill, being a provision with respect
          to the capacity of a person who holds or accepts an office
          of profit under the Crown specified in the Bill to be
          elected or to sit and vote as a Member of either House of
          Parliament,
          (d) a provision with respect to the persons capable of
          being elected or of sitting and voting as Members of either
          House of Parliament which applies in the same way to the
          persons capable of being elected or of sitting and voting
          as Members of the other House of Parliament, or
          (e) a provision with respect to the circumstances in which
          the seat of a Member of either House of Parliament becomes
          vacant which applies in the same way to the circumstances
          in which the seat of a Member of the other House of
          Parliament becomes vacant.
     (8) In this section a reference to the Legislative Council shall be
     construed as a reference to the Legislative Council as reconstituted
     from time to time in accordance with this Act.
 

CONSTITUTION ACT 1902
- SECT 7B
Referendum for Bills with respect to Legislative Assembly and certain other
matters
 
 
7B Referendum for Bills with respect to Legislative Assembly and certain other
matters
     (1) A Bill that:
          (a) expressly or impliedly repeals or amends section 11B,
          26, 27, 28 or 29, Part 9, the Seventh Schedule or this
          section, or
          (b) contains any provision to reduce or extend, or to
          authorise the reduction or extension of, the duration of
          any Legislative Assembly or to alter the date required to
          be named for the taking of the poll in the writs for a
          general election,
     shall not be presented to the Governor for Her Majesty’s assent
     until the Bill has been approved by the electors in accordance with
     this section.
     (2) On a day not sooner than two months after the passage of the Bill
     through both Houses of the Legislature the Bill shall be submitted to
     the electors entitled to vote at a general election of Members of the
     Legislative Assembly.
     (3) The day referred to in subsection (2) shall be appointed by the
     Governor under and in accordance with the Constitution Further
     Amendment (Referendum) Act 1930 and any Act amending or replacing
     that Act.
     (4) When the Bill is submitted to the electors the vote shall be
     taken under and in accordance with the Constitution Further Amendment
     (Referendum) Act 1930 and any Act amending or replacing that Act.
     (5) If a majority of the electors voting approve the Bill, it shall
     be presented to the Governor for Her Majesty’s assent.
     (6) Nothing contained in this section affects the operation of
     section 5B and a Bill to which this section would otherwise apply
     which has been submitted to the electors under and in accordance with
     section 5B and has been approved by a majority of the electors voting
     may be presented to the Governor for Her Majesty’s assent as if
     this section had not been enacted.
     (7) The provisions of this section do not apply to a provision of a
     Bill, being a provision which would, upon its coming into operation,
     be a law referred to in section 29 (2).
     (8) The provisions of this section do not apply to a provision of a
     Bill, being a provision that would, upon its coming into operation,
     be a law that amends section 52 for the purpose of extending the
     application of Part 9 to additional judicial offices or classes of
     judicial offices.
 

CONSTITUTION ACT 1902
- SECT 8A
Assent to Bills
 
 
8A Assent to Bills
     (1) Except as otherwise provided by this Act, every Bill:
          (a) shall be presented to the Governor for Her Majesty’s
          assent after its passage through the Legislative Council
          and the Legislative Assembly, and
          (b) shall become an Act of the Legislature when it is
          assented to by the Governor in the name and on behalf of
          Her Majesty.
     (2) Nothing in subsection (1) (b) precludes Her Majesty from
     assenting to a Bill while Her Majesty is personally present in the
     State.
     (3) Every Bill shall, on becoming an Act, be transmitted to and
     enrolled in a public repository of State documents.
 

CONSTITUTION ACT 1902
- SECT 9
Meaning of “unavailable”
 
 
9 Meaning of “unavailable”
For the purposes of this Part, the Governor or any other officer is
>"unavailable" if the Governor or other officer:
     (a) has assumed the administration of the government of the
     Commonwealth, or
     (b) is absent from the State, or
     (c) is physically or mentally incapacitated, or
     (d) is otherwise unavailable to exercise and perform his or her
     powers and functions.
 

CONSTITUTION ACT 1902
- SECT 9A
Appointment of Governor
 
 
9A Appointment of Governor
     (1) There shall continue to be a Governor of the State.
     (2) The appointment of a person to the office of Governor shall be
     during Her Majesty’s pleasure by Commission under Her Majesty’s
     Sign Manual and the Public Seal of the State.
     (3) Before assuming office, a person appointed to be Governor shall
     take the Oath or Affirmation of Allegiance and the Oath or
     Affirmation of Office in the presence of the Chief Justice or another
     Judge of the Supreme Court.
 

CONSTITUTION ACT 1902
- SECT 9B
Appointment of Lieutenant-Governor and Administrator
 
 
9B Appointment of Lieutenant-Governor and Administrator
     (1) There shall continue to be:
          (a) a Lieutenant-Governor of the State, and
          (b) an Administrator of the State.
     (2) The appointment of a person to the office of Lieutenant-Governor
     shall be during Her Majesty’s pleasure by Commission under Her
     Majesty’s Sign Manual and the Public Seal of the State.
     (3) The Administrator shall be:
          (a) the Chief Justice of the Supreme Court, or
          (b) if the Chief Justice is the Lieutenant-Governor or if
          there is a vacancy in the office of Chief Justice or the
          Chief Justice is unavailable—the next most senior Judge
          of the Supreme Court who is for the time being available,
     and shall be deemed to have been appointed as Administrator during
     Her Majesty’s pleasure.
     (4) A person may be appointed as Administrator during Her Majesty’s
     pleasure by Commission under Her Majesty’s Sign Manual and the
     Public Seal of the State and, where such an Administrator has been
     appointed and is available, subsection (3) does not apply.
     (5) The Lieutenant-Governor or Administrator shall not assume the
     administration of the government of the State or act as deputy to the
     Governor unless the Lieutenant-Governor or Administrator, as the case
     may be, has taken on that occasion, or has previously taken, the Oath
     or Affirmation of Allegiance and the Oath or Affirmation of Office in
     the presence of the Chief Justice or another Judge of the Supreme
     Court.
     (6) Any act, matter or thing done or omitted by the Chief Justice of
     the Supreme Court (before or after the commencement of this
     subsection) in the capacity of Lieutenant-Governor is taken to have
     been done or omitted, and always to have been done or omitted, in the
     capacity of Administrator if for any reason the Chief Justice was not
     holding office as Lieutenant-Governor at the relevant time. This
     subsection extends to any act, matter or thing done or omitted as the
     Governor’s deputy under section 9D.
 

CONSTITUTION ACT 1902
- SECT 9C
Administration of government by Lieutenant-Governor or Administrator
 
 
9C Administration of government by Lieutenant-Governor or Administrator
     (1) The Lieutenant-Governor or Administrator shall, subject to this
     section, assume the administration of the government of the State if:
          (a) there is a vacancy in the office of Governor, or
          (b) the Governor is unavailable.
     (2) The Governor shall not, for the purposes of this section, be
     regarded as being unavailable at any time when there is a subsisting
     appointment of a deputy under section 9D and the deputy is available.
     (3) The Administrator shall not assume the administration of the
     government of the State unless there is a vacancy in the office of
     Lieutenant-Governor or the Lieutenant-Governor is unavailable.
     (4) The Lieutenant-Governor or Administrator shall, upon assuming the
     administration of the government of the State, notify:
          (a) the Premier, or
          (b) in the event that the Premier is not able to be
          contacted to give the notification—the next most senior
          Minister of the Crown (if any) who is able to be contacted.
     Notification is not required if concurrence is required under
     subsection (4A) for the assumption of administration.
     (4A) The Lieutenant-Governor or Administrator shall not assume the
     administration of the government of the State because of any
     unavailability referred to in section 9 (d) unless:
          (a) the Premier has concurred in the assumption of
          administration, or
          (b) in the event that the Premier is not able to be
          contacted to obtain concurrence—the next most senior
          Minister of the Crown (if any) who is able to be contacted
          has concurred in the assumption of administration, or
          (c) neither the Premier nor any other Minister of the Crown
          is able to be contacted to obtain concurrence, and the
          Lieutenant-Governor or Administrator is of the opinion that
          the assumption of administration is authorised by
          subsection (4B).
     The Premier or other Minister is not to give concurrence unless of
     the opinion that the assumption of administration is authorised by
     subsection (4B).
     (4B) An assumption of administration because of any unavailability
     referred to in section 9 (d) is authorised if:
          (a) the powers or functions of the Governor are required to
          be exercised or performed during that unavailability, or
          (b) the duration of that unavailability cannot be
          determined,
     and exceptional circumstances require the assumption of
     administration.
     (5) The powers and functions of the Governor vest in the Lieutenant-
     Governor or Administrator during the administration of the government
     of the State by the Lieutenant-Governor or Administrator, as the case
     may be.
     (6) The Lieutenant-Governor shall cease to administer the government
     of the State when:
          (a) a person is appointed to fill the vacancy in the office
          of Governor and has taken the required oaths or
          affirmations, or
          (b) the Governor ceases to be unavailable,
     as the case requires, and the Lieutenant-Governor has been notified
     accordingly.
     (7) The Administrator shall cease to administer the government of the
     State when:
          (a) a person is appointed to fill the vacancy in the office
          of Governor or Lieutenant-Governor and has taken the
          required oaths or affirmations, or
          (b) the Governor or Lieutenant-Governor ceases to be
          unavailable,
     as the case requires, and the Administrator has been notified
     accordingly.
 

CONSTITUTION ACT 1902
- SECT 9D
Deputy for Governor during short illness or absence
 
 
9D Deputy for Governor during short illness or absence
     (1) In the event that:
          (a) the Governor is to be absent from the State or absent
          from Sydney but not the State or is suffering from illness,
          and
          (b) the Governor has reason to believe that the duration of
          the absence or illness will not exceed 4 weeks,
     the Governor may, by instrument in writing, appoint the Lieutenant-
     Governor or Administrator to be the Governor’s deputy during that
     absence or illness and in that capacity to exercise and perform on
     behalf of the Governor such of the powers and functions of the
     Governor as are specified or described in the instrument during the
     period specified or described in the instrument.
     (2) The Administrator shall not be appointed as deputy under this
     section unless there is a vacancy in the office of Lieutenant-
     Governor or the Lieutenant-Governor is unavailable.
     (3) The Governor shall not appoint a deputy under this section
     unless:
          (a) the Premier has concurred in the appointment of the
          deputy, or
          (b) in the event that the Premier is not able to be
          contacted to obtain concurrence—the next most senior
          Minister of the Crown (if any) who is able to be contacted
          has concurred in the appointment of the deputy, or
          (c) neither the Premier nor any other Minister of the Crown
          is able to be contacted to obtain concurrence.
     (4) The appointment of a person as deputy under this section may be
     revoked by the Governor at any time.
     (5) The powers and functions of the Governor shall not be abridged,
     altered or in any way affected by the appointment of a person as
     deputy under this section.
 

CONSTITUTION ACT 1902
- SECT 9E
Oaths or Affirmations of Allegiance and of Office
 
 
9E Oaths or Affirmations of Allegiance and of Office
For the purposes of this Part:
     (a) a reference to the Oath or Affirmation of Allegiance is a
     reference to an Oath or Affirmation swearing or affirming to be
     faithful and bear true allegiance to Her Majesty and Her Majesty’s
     heirs and successors according to law, and
     (b) a reference to the Oath or Affirmation of Office is a reference
     to an Oath or Affirmation swearing or affirming well and truly to
     serve Her Majesty and Her Majesty’s heirs and successors in the
     particular office and to do right to all manner of people after the
     laws and usages of the State, without fear or favour, affection or
     ill-will.
 

CONSTITUTION ACT 1902
- SECT 9F
Letters Patent and Instructions cease to have effect
 
 
9F Letters Patent and Instructions cease to have effect
The Letters Patent dated 29 October 1900, as amended, relating to the office of
Governor of the State and all Instructions to the Governor cease to have effect
on the commencement of the Constitution (Amendment) Act 1987.
 

CONSTITUTION ACT 1902
- SECT 9G
Continuation of existing Commissions, appointments etc
 
 
9G Continuation of existing Commissions, appointments etc
     (1) Any existing Commission or appointment given or made pursuant to
     Letters Patent or pursuant to Instructions referred to in section 9F
     shall continue in force until revoked or terminated.
     (2) A person who holds office under any such Commission or
     appointment as:
          (a) the Governor,
          (b) the Lieutenant-Governor,
          (c) a Minister of the Crown,
          (d) a member of the Executive Council, or
          (e) the Vice-President of the Executive Council,
     shall, on the commencement of the Constitution (Amendment) Act 1987,
     be deemed to have been appointed to that office under this Act.
     (3) The Constitution (Amendment) Act 1987 does not affect anything
     done in pursuance of any such Commission or appointment.
     (4) Any oath or affirmation taken before the commencement of the
     Constitution (Amendment) Act 1987 for the purposes of any such
     Commission or appointment shall be deemed to have been taken pursuant
     to this Act.
     (5) Subsection (1) does not continue in force:
          (a) a provision of any such Commission or appointment that
          is inconsistent with any law, or
          (b) the dormant Commission appointing an Administrator of
          the government of the State dated 16 October 1933.
 

CONSTITUTION ACT 1902
- SECT 9H
Public Seal of the State
 
 
9H Public Seal of the State
     (1) The Governor shall provide, keep and use the Public Seal of the
     State.
     (2) The seal which, immediately before the commencement of the
     Constitution (Amendment) Act 1987, was used as the Public Seal of the
     State shall continue to be so used until a new seal is provided by
     the Governor.
 

CONSTITUTION ACT 1902
- SECT 9I
Governor’s salary
 
 
9I Governor’s salary
     (1) The annual amount payable for the salary of a Governor appointed
     to that office is $80,000 or such greater amount as is determined
     from time to time by regulation.
     (2) Such a regulation may be made by a Governor (whether or not his
     or her salary is thereby affected), or by any person for the time
     being administering the Government, or by a deputy in accordance with
     section 9D.
     (4) The salary of a Governor as provided for from time to time under
     this section is not capable of being reduced by the making,
     amendment, operation, expiry or repeal (otherwise than on
     disallowance) of a regulation.
     (5) The salary of a Governor as provided for from time to time under
     this section is payable out of the Consolidated Fund, which is
     accordingly appropriated to the necessary extent.
     (6) Salary is not payable under this section to a Governor for any
     period for which he or she is entitled to salary from the
     Commonwealth in respect of his or her administration of the
     Government of the Commonwealth.
 

CONSTITUTION ACT 1902
- SECT 10
Time and place for holding sessions of Parliament
 
 
10 Time and place for holding sessions of Parliament
The Governor may fix the time and place for holding every Session of the
Legislative Council and Assembly, and may change or vary such time or place as
he may judge advisable and most consistent with general convenience and the
public welfare, giving sufficient notice thereof.
 

CONSTITUTION ACT 1902
- SECT 10A
Prorogation of Parliament
 
 
10A Prorogation of Parliament
     (1) The Governor may, by proclamation, prorogue the Legislative
     Council and Assembly whenever the Governor considers it expedient to
     do so (subject to this section and section 24B).
     (2) The Premier or Executive Council may not advise the Governor to
     prorogue the Legislative Council and Assembly on a date that is
     before 26 January in the calendar year in which the Legislative
     Assembly is due to expire and that is after the fourth Saturday in
     the preceding September.
 

CONSTITUTION ACT 1902
- SECT 11
One session of Parliament to be held in each year
 
 
11 One session of Parliament to be held in each year
There shall be a Session of the Legislative Council and Assembly once at least
in every year, so that a period of twelve months shall not intervene between
the last sitting of the Legislative Council and Assembly in one Session and the
first sitting of the Legislative Council and Assembly in the next Session.
 

CONSTITUTION ACT 1902
- SECT 11A
Elections to be held pursuant to writs
 
 
11A Elections to be held pursuant to writs
Every general election of Members of the Legislative Assembly and every
periodic Council election shall be held pursuant to writs issued by the
Governor.
 

CONSTITUTION ACT 1902
- SECT 11B
Compulsory voting
 
 
11B Compulsory voting
A person who is entitled to vote at a periodic Council election or the election
of a Member of the Legislative Assembly shall vote at the election and if he
does not do so shall be liable to such penalty as may be provided by law.
 

CONSTITUTION ACT 1902
- SECT 12
No Member to sit or vote until pledge of loyalty or oath of allegiance taken
 
 
12 No Member to sit or vote until pledge of loyalty or oath of allegiance taken
     (1) A Member of the Legislative Council or the Legislative Assembly
     is not permitted to sit or vote in the House to which the Member has
     been elected until the Member has taken the pledge of loyalty or oath
     of allegiance before the Governor or other person authorised by the
     Governor for that purpose.
     (2) The pledge of loyalty is to be in the following form:
          Under God, I pledge my loyalty to Australia and to the
          people of New South Wales.
     (3) A Member may omit the words “Under God” when taking the
     pledge of loyalty.
     (4) The oath of allegiance is to be in the following form (with the
     name of the reigning Sovereign substituted, where appropriate):
          I swear that I will be faithful and bear true allegiance to
          Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth II, Her heirs and successors
          according to law. So help me God.
     (4A) A Member may, instead of taking an oath of allegiance, make an
     affirmation to the same effect.
     (4B) It is not necessary for a Member who has taken or made an oath
     or affirmation of allegiance to take or make that oath or affirmation
     again after any demise of the Crown, including by or on abdication.
     (5) This section applies only to Members elected after the
     commencement of the Constitution Amendment (Pledge of Loyalty) Act
     2006.
 

CONSTITUTION ACT 1902
- SECT 13
Disqualifications
 
 
13 Disqualifications
     (1) Any person who directly, or indirectly, himself, or by any person
     whatsoever in trust for him or for his use or benefit or on his
     account, undertakes, executes, holds, or enjoys in the whole or in
     part any contract or agreement for or on account of the Public
     Service of New South Wales shall be incapable of being elected or of
     sitting or voting as a Member of the Legislative Council or
     Legislative Assembly during the time he executes, holds or enjoys any
     such contract or any part or share thereof or any benefit or
     emolument arising from the same.
     (2) If any person being a Member of such Council or Assembly enters
     into any such contract or agreement, or, having entered into it,
     continues to hold it, his seat shall be declared by the said
     Legislative Council or Legislative Assembly, as the case may require,
     to be vacant, and thereupon the same shall become and be vacant
     accordingly.
     (3) Provided that nothing in subsection (1) or (2) contained shall
     extend to any contract or agreement made, entered into, or accepted
     by any incorporated company, or any trading company consisting of
     more than twenty persons, where such contract or agreement is made,
     entered into, or accepted, for the general benefit of such
     incorporated or trading company.
     (4) It is hereby declared that nothing in subsection (1) or (2)
     extends to:
          (a) a contract or agreement for or in respect of a loan to
          the Treasurer or to a body authorised to borrow by Act of
          Parliament,
          (b) a contract or agreement the benefit or burden of which
          or any interest in which devolves upon a person:
               (i) as beneficiary under a will or as a person
               entitled to share in the estate of an
               intestate—until he has been in possession of
               the benefit, burden or interest, as the case may
               be, for one year from the date of commencement of
               the Constitution (Amendment) Act 1962 or from the
               date of the devolution, whichever is the later
               date,
               (ii) as executor, administrator or
               trustee—until he has been in possession of the
               benefit, burden or interest, as the case may be,
               for three years from the date of commencement of
               the Constitution (Amendment) Act 1962 or from the
               date of the devolution, whichever is the later
               date,
          (c) a compromise or settlement in respect of compensation
          or other money payable by Her Majesty or a statutory body
          representing Her Majesty,
          (d) a lease, licence for occupation, sale, purchase or
          exchange of land, or a contract or agreement for such a
          lease, sale, purchase or exchange or for the occupation of
          land or for an easement; or a gift or an agreement for a
          gift by any person of land to or for Her Majesty or a
          statutory body representing Her Majesty,
          (e) a contract or agreement for the supply or provision by
          or to or for Her Majesty or a statutory body representing
          Her Majesty of goods, wares or merchandise or services
          (including the provision of insurance or indemnity) where
          the goods, wares or merchandise or services (including the
          provision of insurance or indemnity) are supplied or
          provided on the like terms as those on which they are
          ordinarily supplied or provided to members of the public,
          (f) a loan by Her Majesty or a statutory body representing
          Her Majesty to any person upon the security of a mortgage,
          bill of sale, lien or other security upon and subject to
          the like terms as those ordinarily imposed by Her Majesty
          or the statutory body on loans made to members of the
          public.
     Notice of any such compromise or settlement as is referred to in
     paragraph (c) that takes place after the commencement of the
     Constitution (Amendment) Act 1962 shall be published in the Gazette
     within two months from the date of the compromise or settlement, as
     the case may be.
     (4A) Nothing in:
          (a) subsection (1) applies so as to prevent a person who
          holds an office of profit under the Crown or has a pension
          from the Crown during pleasure or for a term of years from
          being elected or of sitting or voting as a Member of either
          House of Parliament, or
          (b) subsection (2) requires or permits the seat of a Member
          of either House of Parliament who accepts such an office or
          such a pension to be declared to be, or to become or be,
          vacant,
     by reason only of his holding or accepting that office of profit or
     his having or accepting that pension.
     (4B) In subsection (4A),
     >"office of profit under the Crown" includes any office or place of
     profit under the Crown which, by any Act, is declared or deemed not
     to be an office or place of profit under the Crown for the purposes
     of any Act or of this Act, whether in those terms or in terms to the
     like effect.
     (4C) Nothing in:
          (a) subsection (1) applies so as to prevent a person from
          being elected or from sitting or voting as a Member of
          either House of Parliament, or
          (b) subsection (2) requires or permits the seat of a Member
          of either House of Parliament to be declared to be, or to
          become or be, vacant,
     on the ground that he or she elects or agrees to be provided with, or
     receives, employment benefits (including salary sacrifice
     contributions for superannuation) under the Parliamentary
     Remuneration Act 1989 or any other Act.
     (5) In this section,
     >"statutory body representing Her Majesty" includes any statutory
     body that is part of, or that exercises any function that is a
     function of, the Public Service of New South Wales.
 

CONSTITUTION ACT 1902
- SECT 13A
Further disqualifications
 
 
13A Further disqualifications
     (1) If a Member of either House of Parliament:
          (a) fails for one whole Session of the Legislative Council
          and Assembly to give his attendance in the House of which
          he is a Member, unless excused in that behalf by the
          permission of that House entered upon its journals,
          (b) takes any oath or makes any declaration or
          acknowledgment of allegiance, obedience or adherence to any
          foreign prince or power or does or concurs in or adopts any
          act whereby he may become a subject or citizen of any
          foreign state or power or become entitled to the rights,
          privileges or immunities of a subject of any foreign state
          or power,
          (c) becomes bankrupt or takes the benefit of any law for
          the relief of bankrupt or insolvent debtors,
          (d) becomes a public defaulter, or
          (e) is convicted of an infamous crime, or of an offence
          punishable by imprisonment for life or for a term of 5
          years or more, and is the subject of the operation of
          subsection (2),
     his seat as a Member of that House shall thereby become vacant.
     (2) For the purposes of subsection (1) (e), a Member is the subject
     of the operation of this subsection if:
          (a) the Member has not lodged an appeal against the
          conviction within the prescribed period, or
          (b) the conviction has not been quashed on the
          determination of an appeal or appeals lodged within the
          prescribed period, or
          (c) such an appeal has been lodged within the prescribed
          period but has been withdrawn, or has lapsed, without being
          determined, and no other appeal lodged within the
          prescribed period is pending.
     (3) Nothing in this section affects any power that a House has to
     expel a Member of the House.
     (4) An appeal is taken to have lapsed when a court makes a
     declaration to that effect or relevant rules of court treat the
     appeal as having lapsed.
     (5) In this section:
     >"appeal" includes a notice of appeal and an application for leave to
     appeal, and any appeal lodged pursuant to such a notice or pursuant
     to leave granted on such an application.
     >"prescribed period", in relation to an appeal, means the period
     within which the appeal may be lodged, but does not include any
     extension of a period which a court may grant.
     >"quash" a conviction means quash or otherwise set aside the
     conviction.
 

CONSTITUTION ACT 1902
- SECT 13B
Office of profit or pension from Crown
 
 
13B Office of profit or pension from Crown
     (1) A person:
          (a) holding an office of profit under the Crown, or
          (b) having a pension from the Crown during pleasure or for
          a term of years,
     shall not, if he is elected as a Member of either House of
     Parliament, be capable of sitting and voting as a Member of the House
     to which he is elected, and his seat as a Member shall become vacant,
     after the expiration of the period commencing with his election and
     ending on the expiration of 7 sitting days of that House after notice
     of his holding that office or having that pension has been given to
     that House in accordance with its Standing Rules and Orders, unless
     that House has previously passed a resolution indicating that it is
     satisfied that that person has ceased to hold that office or, as the
     case may be, that the right of that person to that pension has ceased
     or is suspended while he is a Member of that House.
     (2) If a Member of either House of Parliament accepts any office of
     profit under the Crown or pension from the Crown during pleasure or
     for a term of years, his seat as a Member of that House shall become
     vacant upon the expiration of the period commencing with his
     acceptance of the office or the pension and ending on the expiration
     of 7 sitting days of that House after notice of his accepting that
     office or pension has been given to that House in accordance with its
     Standing Rules and Orders, unless that House has previously passed a
     resolution indicating that it is satisfied that that Member has
     ceased to hold that office or, as the case may be, that the right of
     that Member to that pension has ceased or is suspended while he is a
     Member of that House.
     (3) Notwithstanding subsection (1) or (2):
          (a) a person:
               (i) who holds or accepts the office of Minister
               of the Crown or any office of profit under the
               Crown created by an Act as an office of the
               Executive Government,
               (ii) who holds or accepts an office of profit
               under the Crown in respect of which he is not
               entitled to any remuneration, except either fees
               payable to him, as a member of a body, in respect
               of his attendance at meetings of that body or an
               allowance for reasonable expenses incurred or to
               be incurred in carrying out the duties of the
               office, or both those fees and such an allowance,
               (iii) who holds or accepts an office of profit
               under the Crown, other than the Crown in right of
               the State of New South Wales, but not being an
               office as a member of any legislature of a
               country other than New South Wales, or
               (iv) who has or accepts a pension, referred to in
               subsection (1) (b) or (2), from the Crown, other
               than the Crown in right of the State of New South
               Wales,
          shall be capable of being elected and of sitting and voting
          as a Member of either House of Parliament,
          (b) a person who holds or accepts the office of Vice-
          President of the Executive Council shall be capable of
          being elected and of sitting and voting as a Member of
          either House of Parliament, and
          (c) a person who holds or accepts the office of
          Parliamentary Secretary shall be capable of being elected
          and of sitting and voting as a Member of either House of
          Parliament.
     (4) For the purposes of subsections (1) and (2), sitting days shall
     be counted, whether or not they occur during the same session of
     Parliament.
 

CONSTITUTION ACT 1902
- SECT 13C
Member of one House ineligible for other
 
 
13C Member of one House ineligible for other
A Member of either House of Parliament shall not be capable of being elected or
of sitting or voting as a Member of the other House.
 

CONSTITUTION ACT 1902
- SECT 13D
Abatement of salary of Members receiving pension or superannuation as public
servants
 
 
13D Abatement of salary of Members receiving pension or superannuation as
public servants
A Member of either House of Parliament in receipt of any allowance or pension
granted under any Act authorising the grant of superannuation allowances or
pensions to officers in the Public Service shall be entitled to the salary
authorised by the Parliamentary Remuneration Tribunal Act 1975, subject to its
abatement by the amount he receives or is entitled to as that allowance or
pension.
 

CONSTITUTION ACT 1902
- SECT 14
Summons or election of disqualified persons
 
 
14 Summons or election of disqualified persons
     (1) If any person by this Act, except section 13B, disabled or
     declared to be incapable to sit or vote in the Legislative Council or
     Legislative Assembly is, nevertheless, elected and returned as a
     Member to serve in the said Council or the said Assembly, such
     election and return shall be declared by the said Council and
     Assembly, as the case may require, to be void, and thereupon the same
     shall become and be void to all intents and purposes whatsoever.
     (2) If any person under any of the disqualifications mentioned in
     section 13 presumes, whilst so disqualified, to sit or vote as a
     Member of the said Council or Assembly, such person shall forfeit the
     sum of one thousand dollars to be recovered by any person who sues
     for the same in the Supreme Court of New South Wales.
 

CONSTITUTION ACT 1902
- SECT 14A
Disclosure of pecuniary interests and other matters by Members
 
 
14A Disclosure of pecuniary interests and other matters by Members
     (1) The Governor may, subject to subsections (4) and (5), make
     regulations for or with respect to:
          (a) the disclosure by Members of either House of Parliament
          of all or any of the following pecuniary interests or other
          matters:
               (i) real or personal property,
               (ii) income,
               (iii) gifts,
               (iv) financial or other contributions to any
               travel,
               (v) shareholdings or other beneficial interests
               in corporations,
               (vi) partnerships,
               (vii) trusts,
               (viii) positions (whether remunerated or not)
               held in, or membership of, corporations, trade
               unions, professional associations or other
               organisations or associations,
               (ix) occupations, trades, professions or
               vocations,
               (x) debts,
               (xi) payments of money or transfers of property
               to relatives or other persons by, or under
               arrangements made by, Members,
               (xii) any other direct or indirect benefits,
               advantages or liabilities, whether pecuniary or
               not, of a kind specified in the regulations,
          (b) prescribing the manner in which, and the times at
          which, pecuniary interests or other matters shall be
          disclosed and providing for the verification by statutory
          declaration or otherwise of any such disclosure, and
          (c) the compilation and maintenance of registers of
          pecuniary interests or other matters disclosed by Members
          of either House of Parliament and the inspection and
          publication of any such register.
     (2) If a Member of either House of Parliament wilfully contravenes
     any regulation made under subsection (1), that House may, in
     accordance with subsection (3), declare his seat vacant and the seat
     of the Member shall thereupon become vacant.
     (3) A declaration under subsection (2) shall:
          (a) specify the circumstances that constitute the
          contravention,
          (b) declare that the House is of the opinion that the
          contravention is of such a nature as to warrant the seat of
          the Member being declared vacant, and
          (c) be made in accordance with such Standing Rules and
          Orders of the House as may regulate the making of the
          declaration.
     (4) A regulation shall not be made under subsection (1) for or with
     respect to the disclosure by Members of either House of Parliament of
     pecuniary interests or other matters unless it applies in the same
     way to the disclosure by Members of the other House of Parliament of
     pecuniary interests or other matters.
     (5) The Governor shall, before making a regulation under subsection
     (1):
          (a) afford any committee of either House of Parliament
          established for the purpose an opportunity of considering
          and making representations with respect to the proposed
          regulation, and
          (b) take into account any such representations.
     (6) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in the Interpretation
     Act 1987 or any other Act, a regulation made under subsection (1), or
     any part thereof, shall not cease to have effect upon its
     disallowance by either House of Parliament unless it has previously
     been disallowed by the other House of Parliament.
     (7) The publication, pursuant to any regulation made under subsection
     (1), of a register of pecuniary interests or other matters disclosed
     by Members of either House of Parliament shall, for the purposes of
     the Parliamentary Papers (Supplementary Provisions) Act 1975, be
     deemed to have been authorised by that House.
 

CONSTITUTION ACT 1902
- SECT 15
Standing Rules and Orders to be laid before Governor
 
 
15 Standing Rules and Orders to be laid before Governor
     (1) The Legislative Council and Legislative Assembly shall, as there
     may be occasion, prepare and adopt respectively Standing Rules and
     Orders regulating:
          (a) the orderly conduct of such Council and Assembly
          respectively, and
          (b) the manner in which such Council and Assembly shall be
          presided over in case of the absence of the President or
          the Speaker, and
          (c) the mode in which such Council and Assembly shall
          confer, correspond, and communicate with each other
          relative to Votes or Bills passed by, or pending in, such
          Council and Assembly respectively, and
          (d) the manner in which Notices of Bills, Resolutions and
          other business intended to be submitted to such Council and
          Assembly respectively at any Session thereof may be
          published for general information, and
          (e) the proper passing, entitling, and numbering of the
          Bills to be introduced into and passed by the said Council
          and Assembly, and
          (f) the proper presentation of the same to the Governor for
          His Majesty’s Assent, and
          (g) any other matter that, by or under this Act, is
          required or permitted to be regulated by Standing Rules and
          Orders.
     (2) Such Rules and Orders shall by such Council and Assembly
     respectively be laid before the Governor, and being by him approved
     shall become binding and of force.
 

CONSTITUTION ACT 1902
- SECT 16
Definitions
 
 
16 Definitions
In this Division:
>"periodic Council election" includes an election for the return of 15 Members
of the Legislative Council held after the commencement of the Constitution and
Parliamentary Electorates and Elections (Amendment) Act 1978 and before the
commencement of the 1991 reconstitution Act.
>"the 1991 reconstitution Act" means the Constitution (Legislative Council)
Amendment Act 1991.
 

CONSTITUTION ACT 1902
- SECT 17
Reconstitution of the Legislative Council
 
 
17 Reconstitution of the Legislative Council
     (1) On the commencement of the 1991 reconstitution Act, the
     Legislative Council is reconstituted.
     (2) On and from that commencement, the Legislative Council shall
     (subject to this Division) consist of 42 Members elected at periodic
     Council elections.
     (3) The following Members of the Legislative Council cease to be
     Members on the commencement of the 1991 reconstitution Act:
          (a) the last 3 members of the Legislative Council elected
          at the third-last periodic Council election held before
          that commencement,
          (b) if the seat of such a Member has become vacant since
          that periodic Council election—a Member of the
          Legislative Council who is the successor (whether
          immediate, intermediate or ultimate) of that Member.
 

CONSTITUTION ACT 1902
- SECT 22
Eligibility to vote at periodic Council elections
 
 
22 Eligibility to vote at periodic Council elections
The persons who would, if a periodic Council election were a general election
of Members of the Legislative Assembly, be entitled to vote at that general
election, and only those persons, shall be entitled to vote at that periodic
Council election.
 

CONSTITUTION ACT 1902
- SECT 22A
Conduct of periodic Council elections
 
 
22A Conduct of periodic Council elections
     (1) Periodic Council elections shall be conducted in accordance with
     the provisions of the Sixth Schedule.
     (3) A writ for a periodic Council election shall not be issued until
     after the issue of the writs for the general election of Members of
     the Legislative Assembly held next after the immediately preceding
     periodic Council election and, when issued, shall name as the day for
     the taking of the poll the same day as the day for the taking of the
     poll at that general election.
     (4) A reference in subsection (3) to a writ does not include a
     reference to a writ issued by reason of the failure of an election,
     including a failure of an election by reason of its being declared
     void in accordance with law.
     (5) Subsection (1) does not limit the power of the Legislature to
     make laws (being laws that do not expressly or impliedly repeal or
     amend any of the provisions of the Sixth Schedule and are not
     inconsistent with any of those provisions) for or with respect to the
     conduct of periodic Council elections.
 

CONSTITUTION ACT 1902
- SECT 22B
Term of service of Members of Legislative Council
 
 
22B Term of service of Members of Legislative Council
     (1) A Member of the Legislative Council shall cease to be a Member of
     the Legislative Council:
          (a) on the day of his death,
          (b) on the day on which his seat as such a Member becomes
          vacant, otherwise than by reason of paragraph (c), or
          (c) on the day on which his term of service as a Member
          expires under subsection (2), (3) or (4),
     whichever first occurs.
     (2) Subject to subsection (4), the term of service of a Member of the
     Legislative Council (other than a long-term continuing Member) shall
     expire on the day of the termination, either by dissolution or
     expiry, of the Legislative Assembly next preceding the second general
     election of Members of the Legislative Assembly to be held after his
     or her election as a Member of the Legislative Council.
     (3) Subject to subsection (4), the term of service of a long-term
     continuing Member shall expire on the day of the termination, either
     by dissolution or expiry, of the Legislative Assembly next preceding
     the third general election of Members of the Legislative Assembly to
     be held after his or her election as a Member of the Legislative
     Council.
     (4) The term of service of a Member of the Legislative Council
     elected to fill the seat of another Member which has become vacant
     otherwise than by reason of subsection (1) (c) shall expire on the
     day on which that other Member’s seat would have become vacant by
     reason of subsection (1) (c).
     (5) In this section,
     >"long-term continuing Member" means:
          (a) a member of the Legislative Council who was one of the
          first 12 Members elected at the third-last periodic Council
          election held before the commencement of the 1991
          reconstitution Act, or
          (b) a Member of the Legislative Council who was one of the
          first 6 Members elected at the second-last periodic Council
          election held before that commencement, or
          (c) if the seat of a Member referred to in paragraph (a) or
          (b) has become vacant since the periodic Council election
          concerned—a Member of the Legislative Council who is the
          successor (whether immediate, intermediate or ultimate) of
          that Member.
 

CONSTITUTION ACT 1902
- SECT 22D
Filling of casual vacancies in seats of Members of Legislative Council by joint
sitting of both Houses
 
 
22D Filling of casual vacancies in seats of Members of Legislative Council by
joint sitting of both Houses
     (1) Whenever:
          (a) a vacancy occurs in the seat of a Member of the
          Legislative Council otherwise than by reason of section 22B
          (1) (c), or
          (b) a vacancy occurs in the seat of a Member of the
          Legislative Council by reason of section 22B (1) (c) and
          that vacancy is not filled by reason that insufficient
          Members of the Legislative Council are elected at the
          periodic Council election next following the occurrence of
          the vacancy,
     the Governor, by message to both Houses of Parliament, shall convene
     a joint sitting of the Members of the Legislative Assembly and the
     Members of the Legislative Council to be held at a place and time
     specified in the message for the purpose of the election of a person
     to fill the vacant seat.
     (2) A person may not be nominated at any such joint sitting for
     election to fill a vacant seat of an elected Member of the
     Legislative Council if he is not eligible to be so nominated under
     subsection (3) or, if applicable, subsection (4).
     (3) A person is not eligible to be so nominated if, were he a Member
     of the Legislative Council, he would be disqualified from sitting or
     voting as such a Member.
     (4) Where:
          (a) a Member of the Legislative Council was elected at a
          periodic Council election and was, at the time of his
          election, publicly recognised by a particular political
          party as being an endorsed candidate of that party and
          publicly represented himself to be such a candidate, and
          (b) the vacancy (not being a vacancy referred to in
          subsection (1) (b)) to be filled is in the seat of that
          Member or of the successor (whether immediate, intermediate
          or ultimate) of that Member,
     a person is not eligible to be so nominated unless he is a member of
     that party, except where there is no member of that party available
     to be so nominated.
     (5) This section does not apply to or in respect of a vacancy that
     occurs by reason that a periodic Council election is declared void in
     accordance with law.
 

CONSTITUTION ACT 1902
- SECT 22E
Members elected at joint sittings of both Houses of Parliament
 
 
22E Members elected at joint sittings of both Houses of Parliament
     (1) The oath or affirmation required to be taken and subscribed or
     made by a Member of the Legislative Council under section 12 shall
     not be taken or made by a person elected at a joint sitting to fill a
     vacancy referred to in section 22D (1) (a) until the expiration of 2
     days after his election.
     (2) If, before a person elected at a joint sitting to fill a vacancy
     referred to in section 22D (1) (a) takes and subscribes the oath or
     makes the affirmation required to be taken and subscribed or made
     under section 12, he ceases to be a member of the political party
     membership of which was necessary under section 22D (4) for him to be
     eligible to be nominated for that election, he shall be deemed not to
     have been elected at that joint sitting and the vacant seat of the
     Member which he was elected to fill shall, when he so ceases to be a
     member of that party, again be vacant.
     (3) More than one vacancy may be filled at the one joint sitting.
 

CONSTITUTION ACT 1902
- SECT 22F
Suspension of Legislative Council business for general election of the
Legislative Assembly
 
 
22F Suspension of Legislative Council business for general election of the
Legislative Assembly
The Legislative Council shall not be competent to dispatch any business during
the period commencing on the day of the termination, either by dissolution or
expiry, of any Legislative Assembly and ending on the day fixed for the return
of the writ for the periodic Council election held next after that termination.
 

CONSTITUTION ACT 1902
- SECT 22G
President
 
 
22G President
     (1) There shall be a President of the Legislative Council, who is the
     Presiding Officer of the Legislative Council and is recognised as its
     independent and impartial representative.
     (2) A person shall be chosen to be President of the Legislative
     Council:
          (a) before the Legislative Council proceeds to the dispatch
          of any other business at its first meeting following a
          periodic Council election, and
          (b) at any other time when the office of President of the
          Legislative Council becomes vacant.
     (3) The person so chosen shall cease to hold office as President of
     the Legislative Council immediately before the Legislative Council
     assembles for the dispatch of business at its first meeting following
     a periodic Council election, and shall also cease to hold that
     office:
          (a) if he ceases to be a Member of the Legislative Council,
          (b) if he is removed from that office by a vote of the
          Legislative Council, or
          (c) if he resigns his office by writing under his hand
          addressed to the Governor.
     (4) Until Standing Rules and Orders of the Legislative Council
     otherwise provide, the President of the Legislative Council shall be
     chosen in accordance with the procedure for the time being for
     choosing the President of the Senate of the Parliament of the
     Commonwealth.
     (5) The President shall preside at all meetings of the Legislative
     Council except as may be provided by the Standing Rules and Orders of
     the Legislative Council.
     (6) The President or other Member presiding may take part in any
     debate or discussion which may arise in the Legislative Council.
     (7) Subject to subsection (5), during the absence from New South
     Wales of the President, the Chair of Committees of the Legislative
     Council shall act in his place and shall, for all purposes, whether
     of this Act or otherwise, have and may exercise and perform all the
     powers, authorities, duties and functions of the President.
     (8) Whenever a vacancy occurs in the seat of a Member of the
     Legislative Council otherwise than by reason of section 22B (1) (c),
     the President may notify the Governor of the vacancy.
 

CONSTITUTION ACT 1902
- SECT 22H
Quorum
 
 
22H Quorum
The presence of at least 8 Members of the Legislative Council (in addition to
the President or other Member presiding) shall be necessary to constitute a
meeting of the Legislative Council for the dispatch of business.
 

CONSTITUTION ACT 1902
- SECT 22I
Determination of questions
 
 
22I Determination of questions
All questions arising in the Legislative Council shall be decided by a majority
of the votes of the Members present other than the President or other Member
presiding and when the votes are equal the President or other Member presiding
shall have a casting vote.
 

CONSTITUTION ACT 1902
- SECT 22J
Resignation of seats in the Legislative Council
 
 
22J Resignation of seats in the Legislative Council
Any Member of the Legislative Council may, by writing under his hand, addressed
to the Governor, resign his seat therein, and upon the receipt of the
resignation by the Governor, the seat of that Member shall become vacant.
 

CONSTITUTION ACT 1902
- SECT 23
Convocation of Assembly
 
 
23 Convocation of Assembly
The Governor may, as occasion requires, by proclamation or otherwise, summon
and call together a Legislative Assembly.
 

CONSTITUTION ACT 1902
- SECT 24
Duration of Assembly
 
 
24 Duration of Assembly
     (1) A Legislative Assembly shall, unless sooner dissolved under
     section 24B, expire on the Friday before the first Saturday in March
     in the fourth calendar year after the calendar year in which the
     return of the writs for choosing that Assembly occurred.
     (2) In this section, a reference to a writ does not include a
     reference to a writ issued because of the failure of an election,
     including a failure of an election because of its being declared void
     in accordance with law.
 

CONSTITUTION ACT 1902
- SECT 24A
Date of general election for Legislative Assembly
 
 
24A Date of general election for Legislative Assembly
The writs for a general election of Members of the Legislative Assembly must
name as the day for the taking of the poll at that general election:
     (a) if the previous Legislative Assembly expired—the fourth
     Saturday in March next following the expiry, or
     (b) if the previous Legislative Assembly was dissolved—a day that
     is not later than the fortieth day from the date of the issue of the
     writs.
 

CONSTITUTION ACT 1902
- SECT 24B
Dissolution of Legislative Assembly during 4 year term
 
 
24B Dissolution of Legislative Assembly during 4 year term
     (1) The Legislative Assembly may be dissolved by the Governor by
     proclamation, but only in the circumstances authorised by this
     section.
     (2) The Legislative Assembly may be dissolved if:
          (a) a motion of no confidence in the Government is passed
          by the Legislative Assembly (being a motion of which not
          less than 3 clear days’ notice has been given in the
          Legislative Assembly), and
          (b) during the period commencing on the passage of the
          motion of no confidence and ending 8 clear days thereafter,
          the Legislative Assembly has not passed a motion of
          confidence in the then Government.
     After the motion of no confidence is passed, the Legislative Assembly
     may not be prorogued before the end of that 8-day period and may not
     be adjourned for a period extending beyond that 8-day period, unless
     the motion of confidence has been passed.
     (3) The Legislative Assembly may be dissolved if it:
          (a) rejects a Bill which appropriates revenue or moneys for
          the ordinary annual services of the Government, or
          (b) fails to pass such a Bill before the time that the
          Governor considers that the appropriation is required.
     This subsection does not apply to a Bill which appropriates revenue
     or moneys for the Legislature only.
     (4) The Legislative Assembly may be dissolved within 2 months before
     the Assembly is due to expire if the general election would otherwise
     be required to be held during the same period as a Commonwealth
     election, during a holiday period or at any other inconvenient time.
     (5) This section does not prevent the Governor from dissolving the
     Legislative Assembly in circumstances other than those specified in
     subsections (2)–(4), despite any advice of the Premier or Executive
     Council, if the Governor could do so in accordance with established
     constitutional conventions.
     (6) When deciding whether the Legislative Assembly should be
     dissolved in accordance with this section, the Governor is to
     consider whether a viable alternative Government can be formed
     without a dissolution and, in so doing, is to have regard to any
     motion passed by the Legislative Assembly expressing confidence in an
     alternative Government in which a named person would be Premier.
 

CONSTITUTION ACT 1902
- SECT 25
Number of Members of Legislative Assembly
 
 
25 Number of Members of Legislative Assembly
Every Legislative Assembly shall consist of 93 Members.
 

CONSTITUTION ACT 1902
- SECT 26
Single Member electorates
 
 
26 Single Member electorates
Each Member of a Legislative Assembly shall be elected to represent one
electoral district only.
 

CONSTITUTION ACT 1902
- SECT 27
Distribution of New South Wales into electoral districts
 
 
27 Distribution of New South Wales into electoral districts
     (1) A distribution of New South Wales into electoral districts shall
     be made:
          (a) forthwith after the date of assent to the Constitution
          (Amendment) Act 1979,
          (b) forthwith after the enactment of any Act for the
          alteration of the number of Members of the Legislative
          Assembly,
          (c) forthwith after a general election of Members of the
          Legislative Assembly if the next previous distribution
          applied for the purpose of that general election and the
          next previous such general election, and
          (d) at such additional times as may be provided by law.
     (2) The number of electoral districts into which New South Wales
     shall be distributed upon any such distribution shall be the number
     that is equal to the number, provided by law, of Members of the
     Legislative Assembly to be returned at the general election of
     Members of the Legislative Assembly to be held next after that
     distribution.
 

CONSTITUTION ACT 1902
- SECT 28
Number of voters in electoral districts
 
 
28 Number of voters in electoral districts
Upon any distribution of New South Wales into electoral districts, the
boundaries of each proposed electoral district shall be so determined that, at
the time the distribution is made, the number of persons entitled to vote at a
general election of Members of the Legislative Assembly in each proposed
electoral district is equal to the quotient obtained by dividing the number of
persons entitled at that time to vote at any such general election in all of
the proposed electoral districts by the number of those proposed electoral
districts, but subject to a margin of allowance not exceeding 10 per cent more
or less of that quotient.
 

CONSTITUTION ACT 1902
- SECT 28A
Special distribution to maintain equal number of voters in each electoral
district
 
 
28A Special distribution to maintain equal number of voters in each electoral
district
     (1) A distribution of New South Wales into electoral districts shall
     be made forthwith after more than one-quarter of the number of
     electoral districts has been malapportioned for a period of more than
     2 months.
     (2) For the purposes of this section, an electoral district is
     malapportioned at any particular time if the number of persons then
     entitled to vote at a general election of Members of the Legislative
     Assembly in the electoral district differs from the average electoral
     district enrolment at that time to a greater extent than 5 per cent
     more or less.
     (3) The average electoral district enrolment is the quotient obtained
     by dividing the number of persons entitled to vote at a general
     election of Members of the Legislative Assembly in all electoral
     districts by the number of those districts.
     (4) A distribution shall not be made under this section if:
          (a) the distribution would commence within 1 year before
          the expiry of the Legislative Assembly by the effluxion of
          time, or
          (b) a distribution has already been made since the last
          general election of Members of the Legislative Assembly
          (whether under this section or not), or
          (c) a distribution is required to be made apart from this
          section.
 

CONSTITUTION ACT 1902
- SECT 29
Conduct of Legislative Assembly elections
 
 
29 Conduct of Legislative Assembly elections
     (1) Elections of Members of the Legislative Assembly shall be
     conducted in accordance with the provisions of the Seventh Schedule.
     (2) Subsection (1) does not limit the power of the Legislature to
     make laws (being laws that do not expressly or impliedly repeal or
     amend any of the provisions of the Seventh Schedule and are not
     inconsistent with any of those provisions) for or with respect to the
     conduct of elections of Members of the Legislative Assembly.
 

CONSTITUTION ACT 1902
- SECT 30
Assembly may proceed to business although writs not exceeding five shall not
have been returned
 
 
30 Assembly may proceed to business although writs not exceeding five shall not
have been returned
Upon any general election the Legislative Assembly shall be competent to
proceed to the dispatch of business at the time appointed by the Governor for
that purpose notwithstanding that any of the writs of election (not exceeding
five) have not been returned, or that in any of the electoral districts the
electors have failed to elect a Member to serve in the said Assembly.
 

CONSTITUTION ACT 1902
- SECT 31
Speaker
 
 
31 Speaker
     (1) There shall be a Speaker of the Legislative Assembly, who is the
     Presiding Officer of the Legislative Assembly and is recognised as
     its independent and impartial representative.
     (2) The Members of the Legislative Assembly shall upon the first
     assembling after every general election proceed forthwith to elect
     one of their number to be Speaker, and in case of his death,
     resignation, or removal by a vote of the said Legislative Assembly,
     the said Members shall forthwith proceed to elect another of such
     Members to be such Speaker.
     (3) The Speaker so elected shall preside at all meetings of the said
     Legislative Assembly except as may be provided by the Standing Rules
     and Orders herein authorised to be made.
     (4) The Speaker may, when not presiding:
          (a) take part in any debate or discussion, and
          (b) vote on any question,
     which may arise in the Legislative Assembly.
 

CONSTITUTION ACT 1902
- SECT 31A
Absence of Speaker from New South Wales
 
 
31A Absence of Speaker from New South Wales
     (1) During the absence from New South Wales of the Speaker the Deputy
     Speaker of the Legislative Assembly shall act in his place, and for
     all purposes, whether of this Act or otherwise, shall have and may
     exercise and perform all the powers, authorities, duties and
     functions of the Speaker.
     (2) Without prejudice to the generality of subsection (1) the Deputy
     Speaker of the Legislative Assembly, while acting in the place of the
     Speaker under that subsection, shall be deemed to be the Speaker for
     the purposes of section 71 of the Parliamentary Electorates and
     Elections Act 1912–1935.
 

CONSTITUTION ACT 1902
- SECT 31B
Manner of election of Speaker
 
 
31B Manner of election of Speaker
     (1) The election of the Speaker shall be conducted by secret ballot.
     A ballot is not required if only one candidate is validly nominated,
     and that candidate shall be declared elected.
     (2) Nominations shall be made in writing, and the identity of the
     nominators and seconders shall not be disclosed by the Clerk of the
     Legislative Assembly or other person presiding at the election. A
     nomination is not validly made unless the person nominated accepts
     nomination, by endorsement on the instrument of nomination.
     (3) Nominations shall not be closed until a reasonable opportunity
     has been given for the Members of the Legislative Assembly desiring
     to do so to make nominations. Further nominations may not be made
     between ballots.
     (4) The candidates with the smallest number of votes shall be
     successively withdrawn one by one, and a fresh ballot shall take
     place after each withdrawal, until one candidate receives the votes
     of at least two-thirds of the number of Members of the Legislative
     Assembly for the time being or (if there are only two candidates
     validly nominated or there are only two candidates left) a majority
     of the number of Members voting at that ballot. That candidate shall
     be declared elected.
     (5) If there is an equality of votes among the candidates with the
     smallest number of votes, the ballot shall be taken again, and if
     again there is such an equality of votes, the Clerk of the
     Legislative Assembly or other person presiding at the election shall
     determine, by lot, which of the candidates with the same number of
     votes shall be withdrawn, as if that candidate had received the
     smallest number of votes.
     (6) If there are only two candidates validly nominated or there are
     only two candidates left, and if there is an equality of votes among
     the two candidates, the ballot shall be taken again, and if again
     there is an equality of votes, the Clerk of the Legislative Assembly
     or other person presiding at the election shall determine, by lot,
     which of the candidates is taken to have received the smaller number
     of votes. The other candidate shall be declared elected.
     (7) The Standing Rules and Orders of the Legislative Assembly may
     make provision, not inconsistent with this section, for or with
     respect to the manner of election of the Speaker and associated
     matters.
     (8) In the absence of relevant Standing Rules and Orders at the time
     of such an election, the election is to be conducted (subject to this
     section and to any necessary adaptations) in accordance with the
     provisions of the Standing Orders of the Senate of the Parliament of
     the Commonwealth that relate to the election of the President of the
     Senate.
 

CONSTITUTION ACT 1902
- SECT 32
Quorum and determination of questions
 
 
32 Quorum and determination of questions
     (1) The presence of at least twenty Members of the Legislative
     Assembly, exclusive of the Member presiding, shall be necessary to
     constitute a meeting of the said Assembly for the dispatch of
     business.
     (2) All questions which may arise in the Legislative Assembly shall
     be decided by the majority of the votes of the Members present other
     than the Member presiding, and when the votes are equal the Member
     presiding shall have a casting vote.
 

CONSTITUTION ACT 1902
- SECT 33
Resignation of seats in the Assembly
 
 
33 Resignation of seats in the Assembly
Any Member of the Legislative Assembly may, by writing under his hand,
addressed to the Speaker, resign his seat therein, and upon the receipt of such
resignation by the Speaker, the seat of such Member shall become vacant.
 

CONSTITUTION ACT 1902
- SECT 35
Definitions
 
 
35 Definitions
In this Part:
>"functions" includes powers, authorities and duties.
>"unavailable", in relation to a Minister of the Crown, means unavailable by
reason of the Minister’s absence or disability or for any other reason.
 

CONSTITUTION ACT 1902
- SECT 35A
Preservation of certain conventions etc relating to advice to Governor
 
 
35A Preservation of certain conventions etc relating to advice to Governor
The enactment of the Constitution (Amendment) Act 1987 does not affect any law
or established constitutional convention relating to the exercise or
performance of the functions of the Governor otherwise than on the advice of
the Executive Council.
 

CONSTITUTION ACT 1902
- SECT 35B
Continuation of Executive Council
 
 
35B Continuation of Executive Council
There shall continue to be an Executive Council to advise the Governor in the
government of the State.
 

CONSTITUTION ACT 1902
- SECT 35C
Members of the Executive Council
 
 
35C Members of the Executive Council
     (1) The Executive Council shall consist of such persons as may be
     appointed by the Governor, from time to time, as members of the
     Executive Council.
     (2) The members of the Executive Council shall hold office during the
     Governor’s pleasure.
     (3) The Governor may appoint one of the members of the Executive
     Council as Vice-President of the Executive Council.
 

CONSTITUTION ACT 1902
- SECT 35CA
Executive Councillor’s pledge of loyalty or oath of allegiance and oath of
office
 
 
35CA Executive Councillor’s pledge of loyalty or oath of allegiance and oath
of office
     (1) Before assuming office, a person appointed as a member of the
     Executive Council is to take:
          (a) the pledge of loyalty or oath of allegiance, and
          (b) the Executive Councillor’s oath of office,
     before the Governor or other person authorised by the Governor for
     that purpose.
     (2) The pledge of loyalty is to be in the following form:
          Under God, I pledge my loyalty to Australia and to the
          people of New South Wales.
     (3) A member of the Executive Council may omit the words “Under
     God” when taking the pledge of loyalty.
     (3A) The oath of allegiance is to be in the following form (with the
     name of the reigning Sovereign substituted, where appropriate):
          I swear that I will be faithful and bear true allegiance to
          Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth II, Her heirs and successors
          according to law. So help me God.
     (4) The Executive Councillor’s oath of office is to be in the
     following form:
          I,being appointed as a member of the Executive Council of
          New South Wales, do swear that I will perform the functions
          and duties of an Executive Councillor faithfully and to the
          best of my ability and, when required to do so, freely give
          my counsel and advice to the Governor or officer
          administering the Government of New South Wales for the
          time being for the good management of the public affairs of
          New South Wales, and that I will not directly or indirectly
          reveal matters debated in the Council and committed to my
          secrecy, but that I will in all things be a true and
          faithful councillor.
          So help me God.
     (5) A member of the Executive Council may, instead of taking an oath
     under this section, make an affirmation to the same effect.
     (6) This section applies only to members of the Executive Council
     appointed after the commencement of the Constitution Amendment
     (Pledge of Loyalty) Act 2006.
 

CONSTITUTION ACT 1902
- SECT 35D
Meetings of the Executive Council
 
 
35D Meetings of the Executive Council
     (1) The Governor shall preside at meetings of the Executive Council.
     (2) The Vice-President of the Executive Council or, in the absence of
     the Vice-President, the senior member present shall preside at any
     meeting of the Executive Council from which the Governor is absent.
     (3) The quorum for a meeting of the Executive Council is 2 members.
     (4) For the purposes of this section, the seniority of members of the
     Executive Council shall be determined according to the order of their
     respective appointments as members of the Executive Council.
 

CONSTITUTION ACT 1902
- SECT 35E
Appointment of Ministers
 
 
35E Appointment of Ministers
     (1) The Premier and other Ministers of the Crown for the State shall
     be appointed by the Governor from among the members of the Executive
     Council.
     (2) The Premier and other Ministers of the Crown shall hold office
     during the Governor’s pleasure.
 

CONSTITUTION ACT 1902
- SECT 36
Authority for Minister of the Crown to act for and on behalf of another
Minister of the Crown
 
 
36 Authority for Minister of the Crown to act for and on behalf of another
Minister of the Crown
     (1) The Governor may, from time to time, authorise a Minister of the
     Crown to act for and on behalf of another Minister of the Crown for
     any period specified or described by the Governor.
     (2) Where a Minister of the Crown is authorised under this section to
     act for and on behalf of another Minister of the Crown, any function
     appertaining or annexed to the office of that other Minister may,
     while the authority remains in force, be exercised or performed from
     time to time by the Minister so authorised instead of by that other
     Minister.
     (3) An authority under this section may be revoked by the Governor.
     (4) A Minister of the Crown may be authorised under this section by
     reference to his name or by reference to the title of the office
     which he holds as Minister of the Crown.
     (5) Notice of an authority under this section, or the revocation of
     such an authority, may be published in the Gazette at any time, and,
     where such a notice is so published, judicial notice shall be taken
     of the notice and of the authority or revocation, as the case may be.
     (6) Every authority under this section shall be recorded by the
     officer in charge of the records of the Executive Council.
 

CONSTITUTION ACT 1902
- SECT 37
Unavailability of Minister of the Crown
 
 
37 Unavailability of Minister of the Crown
A Minister of the Crown may exercise or perform for and on behalf of another
Minister of the Crown a function appertaining or annexed to the office of that
other Minister if the firstmentioned Minister is satisfied that the other
Minister is unavailable and that any Minister of the Crown authorised under
section 36 to exercise or perform that function is unavailable.
 

CONSTITUTION ACT 1902
- SECT 37A
Provisions ancillary to sections 36 and 37
 
 
37A Provisions ancillary to sections 36 and 37
     (1) Sections 36 and 37 apply to the functions appertaining or annexed
     to the office of a Minister of the Crown, whether those functions are
     conferred or imposed by the terms (express or implied) of an Act or
     instrument under an Act, or by or under any other law, or by official
     or other custom, but do not apply to the functions appertaining or
     annexed to that office by virtue of an authority under section 36.
     (2) Any act, matter or thing done or omitted by a Minister of the
     Crown while acting for or on behalf of another Minister of the Crown:
          (a) under an authority under section 36, or
          (b) under the authority of section 37,
     shall be as valid and effectual and shall have the same consequences
     as if the act, matter or thing had been done or omitted by that other
     Minister.
     (3) In all proceedings and before all persons acting judicially, it
     shall be presumed, in the absence of evidence to the contrary, that a
     Minister of the Crown who purports to act for or on behalf of another
     Minister of the Crown was authorised by or under section 36 or 37 so
     to act.
 

CONSTITUTION ACT 1902
- SECT 38
Limitation as to exercise of Attorney-General’s functions
 
 
38 Limitation as to exercise of Attorney-General’s functions
     (1) Nothing in section 36, 37 or 37A authorises a Minister of the
     Crown to exercise any function that is by an Act or any other law
     annexed or incident to the office of the Attorney-General.
     (2) Where a function is annexed or incident to the office of the
     Attorney-General by reason only of the fact that the Attorney-General
     administers an Act or part of an Act, subsection (1) does not apply
     in relation to that function unless the administration of that Act or
     part is expressly vested in the Attorney-General by any Act.
 

CONSTITUTION ACT 1902
- SECT 38A
Powers of Ministers to speak in Legislative Council
 
 
38A Powers of Ministers to speak in Legislative Council
     (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, any Minister of
     the Crown who is a member of the Legislative Assembly may at any
     time, with the consent of the Legislative Council, sit in the
     Legislative Council for the purpose only of explaining the provisions
     of any Bill relating to or connected with any department administered
     by him, and may take part in any debate or discussion in the
     Legislative Council on such Bill, but he shall not vote in the
     Legislative Council.
     (2) It shall not be lawful at any one time for more than one Minister
     of the Crown under the authority of this section to sit in the
     Legislative Council.
 

CONSTITUTION ACT 1902
- SECT 38B
Appointment of Parliamentary Secretaries
 
 
38B Appointment of Parliamentary Secretaries
     (1) The Premier may, from time to time, appoint a Member or Members
     of either House of Parliament to hold office as Parliamentary
     Secretary.
     (2) Section 47 does not apply to or in respect of the office of
     Parliamentary Secretary.
 

CONSTITUTION ACT 1902
- SECT 38C
Functions of Parliamentary Secretary
 
 
38C Functions of Parliamentary Secretary
     (1) A Parliamentary Secretary shall have and may perform such
     functions as the Premier may, from time to time, determine in respect
     of him.
     (2) Nothing in this section authorises a Parliamentary Secretary to
     perform any functions that may, by the terms (express or implied) of
     an Act or instrument under an Act, or by or under any other law, only
     be performed by some other person.
 

CONSTITUTION ACT 1902
- SECT 38D
How Parliamentary Secretary ceases to hold office
 
 
38D How Parliamentary Secretary ceases to hold office
     (1) A person holding office as Parliamentary Secretary ceases to hold
     that office:
          (a) if he dies,
          (b) if the person by whom he was appointed as such ceases
          to be Premier,
          (c) if he resigns his office as such by writing under his
          hand addressed to the Premier,
          (d) if he is removed from office as such by the Premier,
          (e) if his seat as a Member of either House of Parliament
          becomes vacant, otherwise than by reason of the fact that
          the Legislative Assembly has been dissolved or has expired
          by the effluxion of time, or
          (f) upon the day appointed for the taking of the poll for
          the general election of Members of the Legislative Assembly
          next following his appointment to hold that office.
     (2) The Premier may, for any cause which appears to him to be
     sufficient, remove any person from office as Parliamentary Secretary.
 

CONSTITUTION ACT 1902
- SECT 38E
Restrictions relating to Parliamentary Secretaries
 
 
38E Restrictions relating to Parliamentary Secretaries
     (1) A person shall not be appointed to hold office as Parliamentary
     Secretary if he is a Minister of the Crown or a member of the
     Executive Council.
     (2) A person shall not be appointed as a Minister of the Crown or a
     member of the Executive Council if he is a Parliamentary Secretary.
 

CONSTITUTION ACT 1902
- SECT 39
Consolidated Fund
 
 
39 Consolidated Fund
     (1) Except as otherwise provided by or in accordance with any Act,
     all public moneys (including securities and all revenue, loans and
     other moneys whatsoever) collected, received or held by any person
     for or on behalf of the State shall form one Consolidated Fund.
     (2) Without limiting the generality of subsection (1), all
     territorial, casual and other revenues of the Crown (including all
     royalties), from whatever source arising, within New South Wales, and
     as to the disposal of which the Crown may otherwise be entitled
     absolutely, conditionally or in any other way shall form part of the
     Consolidated Fund.
 

CONSTITUTION ACT 1902
- SECT 40
Expenses of collection
 
 
40 Expenses of collection
The Consolidated Fund shall be permanently charged with all the costs, charges,
and expenses incident to the collection, management, and receipt thereof; such
costs, charges, and expenses being subject nevertheless to be reviewed and
audited in such manner as may be directed by any Act.
 

CONSTITUTION ACT 1902
- SECT 45
Appropriation of Consolidated Fund
 
 
45 Appropriation of Consolidated Fund
The Consolidated Fund shall be subject to be appropriated to such specific
purposes as may be prescribed by any Act in that behalf.
 

CONSTITUTION ACT 1902
- SECT 46
Money Bills to be recommended by Governor
 
 
46 Money Bills to be recommended by Governor
     (1) It shall not be lawful for the Legislative Assembly to originate
     or pass any vote, resolution, or Bill for the appropriation of any
     part of the Consolidated Fund, or of any other tax or impost to any
     purpose which has not been first recommended by a message of the
     Governor to the said Assembly during the Session in which such vote,
     resolution, or Bill shall be passed.
     (2) A Governor’s message is not required under this section or
     under the Standing Rules and Orders of the Legislative Assembly for a
     Bill introduced by, or a vote or resolution proposed by, a Minister
     of the Crown.
 

CONSTITUTION ACT 1902
- SECT 47
Appointment of officers
 
 
47 Appointment of officers
     (1) The appointment of all public officers under the Government of
     New South Wales is vested in the Governor with the advice of the
     Executive Council or in a person authorised by legislation to make
     the appointment.
     (2) This section does not apply to the appointment of:
          (a) members of the Executive Council and Ministers of the
          Crown or the holders of any other political office, or
          (b) an officer or employee of either House of Parliament or
          any officer under the separate control of the President or
          Speaker, or under their joint control (other than the Clerk
          of the Parliaments or of either House of Parliament or any
          other officer of the Parliament designated by order of the
          Governor).
 

CONSTITUTION ACT 1902
- SECT 47A
Employment of staff
 
 
47A Employment of staff
     (1) Persons employed by the Government of New South Wales in the
     service of the Crown are to be employed in the Public Service of New
     South Wales under the Government Sector Employment Act 2013 or in any
     other service of the Crown established by legislation.
     (2) A statutory body that is a NSW Government agency, or a person
     holding a public office under the Government of New South Wales,
     cannot employ persons unless legislation specifically authorises the
     body or person to do so.
     (3) This section does not apply to:
          (a) a State owned corporation, or
          (b) the engagement of independent contractors or volunteer
          workers.
 

CONSTITUTION ACT 1902
- SECT 48
Absent officers and staff
 
 
48 Absent officers and staff
     (1) In this section:
     >"functions" includes powers, authorities and duties.
     >"officer" means an officer or employee in the service of the Crown
     or of an authority of the State, but does not include the Governor,
     the Lieutenant-Governor or other officer administering the government
     of the State, a member of the Executive Council, a Minister of the
     Crown or the holder of a judicial office.
     >"unavailable", in relation to an officer, means unavailable by
     reason of the officer’s absence, suspension or disability or for
     any other reason.
     (2) Where, by any Act or statutory or other instrument, any function
     is conferred or imposed on an officer in his capacity as an officer,
     the function may be exercised or performed by another officer whom
     the Governor has directed to exercise the functions of the
     firstmentioned officer during any period when he is unavailable in
     the same manner and to the same extent in all respects as those
     functions might have been exercised or performed by the
     firstmentioned officer.
     (3) Any act, matter or thing done or omitted by an officer while
     acting pursuant to a direction given as referred to in subsection (2)
     in relation to the functions of another officer shall be as valid and
     effectual as if the act, matter or thing had been done or omitted by
     that other officer.
     (4) This section is in addition to and not in derogation of any other
     provision made for the exercise of the functions of an unavailable
     officer (whether by way of temporary appointment or otherwise).
 

CONSTITUTION ACT 1902
- SECT 49A
Demise of the Crown
 
 
49A Demise of the Crown
     (1) The holding of any office under the Crown shall not be affected
     nor shall any fresh appointment thereto be rendered necessary by the
     demise of the Crown.
     (2) It shall not be necessary for the holder of any office under the
     Crown who, before any demise of the Crown, has taken any oath
     prescribed or provided for by any Act or law again to take that oath
     after any such demise but, where that oath relates only to the then
     reigning Sovereign, it shall be deemed to relate to the Sovereign for
     the time being.
     (3) In this section:
     >"demise of the Crown" includes a demise of the Crown by or on
     abdication.
 

CONSTITUTION ACT 1902
- SECT 50A
Definitions: Part 7
 
 
50A Definitions: Part 7
In this Part:
>"administrative arrangements order" means an order made by the Governor under
this Part.
>"administrative change" means:
     (a) the fact of there ceasing to be a Minister, a Public Service
     agency or a Public Service employee of a particular description, or
     (b) the transfer of the administration of an Act, or any portion or
     aspect of an Act, from a Minister to another Minister, or
     (c) the transfer of a function from a Minister, Public Service agency
     or Public Service employee to another Minister, Public Service agency
     or Public Service employee, respectively.
>"description" includes title.
>"Public Service agency" means a Department or other agency of the Public
Service, and includes:
     (a) any part of a Department or other agency of the Public Service,
     and
     (b) that part of the NSW Police Force comprising administrative
     officers under the Police Act 1990, and
     (c) the Transport Service of New South Wales or any part of that
     Service.
>"Public Service employee" means a person employed in a Public Service agency.
>"reference" to a Minister, Public Service agency or Public Service employee
includes a reference that (by or under any Act) is to be construed or treated
as a reference to that Minister, agency or employee.
 

CONSTITUTION ACT 1902
- SECT 50B
Allocation of administration of Acts and other portfolio responsibilities
 
 
50B Allocation of administration of Acts and other portfolio responsibilities
     (1) The Governor may, by an administrative arrangements order,
     allocate to Ministers the administration of Acts and other portfolio
     responsibilities.
     (2) A Minister may, subject to any direction of the Premier, assume
     the administration of an Act, or portfolio responsibility, that has
     not been allocated to a Minister by the Governor under this section.
     (3) In allocating the administration of an Act:
          (a) different portions of the Act may be administered by
          different Ministers, and
          (b) different Ministers may administer the Act in different
          respects, and
          (c) 2 or more Ministers may jointly administer the same Act
          or the same portion of an Act.
     The joint administration of an Act or portion of an Act does not
     require the joint exercise of a Ministerial function.
 

CONSTITUTION ACT 1902
- SECT 50C
Ministers to whom Public Service agencies responsible
 
 
50C Ministers to whom Public Service agencies responsible
     (1) The Governor may, by an administrative arrangements order,
     specify the Minister to whom a Public Service agency is responsible.
     (2) A Minister may, subject to any direction of the Premier, assume
     responsibility for a Public Service agency for which the Governor has
     not determined Ministerial responsibility under this section.
     (3) The same Public Service agency may be responsible to more than
     one Minister.
 

CONSTITUTION ACT 1902
- SECT 50D
Public Service agencies—creation, abolition and changes
 
 
50D Public Service agencies—creation, abolition and changes
     (1) The Governor may, by an administrative arrangements order:
          (a) establish, abolish or change the name of any Public
          Service agency, or
          (b) transfer a part (or all parts) of a Public Service
          agency to another Public Service agency,
     and substitute or amend Schedule 1 to the Government Sector
     Employment Act 2013 for that purpose or any other purpose authorised
     by that Act.
     (2) If the Governor transfers a part or parts of a Public Service
     agency to another Public Service agency under this section:
          (a) the employees in the part or parts of the agency
          transferred become employees of the agency to which the
          transfer is made, and
          (b) the employees continue as employees in the same
          employment in the agency to which the transfer is made.
 

CONSTITUTION ACT 1902
- SECT 50E
Change to references in Acts etc to Ministers, Public Service agencies and
Public Service employees
 
 
50E Change to references in Acts etc to Ministers, Public Service agencies and
Public Service employees
     (1) The Governor may, by an administrative arrangements order,
     require a reference in any Act or statutory or other instrument, or
     in any contract or agreement, to a Minister, Public Service agency or
     Public Service employee by a specified description to be construed as
     a reference to a Minister, Public Service agency or Public Service
     employee, respectively, by another specified description.
     (2) Such a requirement does not apply to or in respect of any Act or
     statutory or other instrument, or any contract or agreement, enacted,
     made or entered into after the requirement took effect.
     (3) An administrative arrangements order under this section need not
     be consequential on or incidental to administrative change.
     (4) For the purposes of this section, a reference to a Minister by a
     specified description extends to a reference to a Minister
     administering a specified Act or portion of an Act.
 

CONSTITUTION ACT 1902
- SECT 50F
Provisions consequent on administrative changes and other matters
 
 
50F Provisions consequent on administrative changes and other matters
     (1) The Governor may, by an administrative arrangements order, make
     such provisions as are necessary or convenient to be made for the
     purpose of dealing with matters that are incidental to or
     consequential on administrative change or the making of an
     administrative arrangements order.
     (2) The provisions that may be made under this section include:
          (a) provisions for the transfer of any property, rights and
          liabilities of a superseded authority (being a Minister,
          Public Service agency or Public Service employee the
          subject of an administrative arrangements order), and
          (b) provisions of a savings or transitional nature.
 

CONSTITUTION ACT 1902
- SECT 50G
Publication, commencement and operation of orders
 
 
50G Publication, commencement and operation of orders
     (1) An administrative arrangements order is to be published on the
     NSW legislation website.
     (2) The order takes effect on the date of its publication on the NSW
     legislation website, or on such other date as may be specified in the
     order. The commencement date can be a date that is earlier than the
     date of publication of the order on the NSW legislation website.
     (3) To the extent to which the order takes effect from a date that is
     earlier than the date of its publication on the NSW legislation
     website, the order does not operate so as:
          (a) to affect, in a manner prejudicial to any person (other
          than the State or an authority of the State), the rights of
          that person existing before the date of its publication, or
          (b) to impose liabilities on any person (other than the
          State or an authority of the State) in respect of anything
          done or omitted to be done before the date of its
          publication.
     (4) An administrative arrangements order may combine any 2 or more of
     the provisions authorised by this Part to be made by such an order.
 

CONSTITUTION ACT 1902
- SECT 51
Local government
 
 
51 Local government
     (1) There shall continue to be a system of local government for the
     State under which duly elected or duly appointed local government
     bodies are constituted with responsibilities for acting for the
     better government of those parts of the State that are from time to
     time subject to that system of local government.
     (2) The manner in which local government bodies are constituted and
     the nature and extent of their powers, authorities, duties and
     functions shall be as determined by or in accordance with laws of the
     Legislature.
     (3) The reference in subsection (2) to laws of the Legislature shall
     be read as a reference to laws that have been enacted by the
     Legislature, whether before or after the commencement of this
     section, and that are for the time being in force.
     (4) For the purposes of this section, the Western Lands Commissioner,
     the Lord Howe Island Board, and an administrator with all or any of
     the functions of a local government body, shall be deemed to be local
     government bodies.
 

CONSTITUTION ACT 1902
- SECT 52
Definition and application
 
 
52 Definition and application
     (1) In this Part:
     >"judicial office" means the office of any of the following:
          (a) Chief Justice, President of the Court of Appeal, Judge
          of Appeal, Judge, Associate Judge or Master of the Supreme
          Court,
          (b) Chief Judge, Deputy Chief Judge or Judge of the
          Industrial Court or member of the Industrial Relations
          Commission in Court Session,
          (c) Chief Judge or Judge of the Land and Environment Court,
          (d) Chief Judge or Judge of the District Court or President
          of the Children’s Court,
          (e) Chief Judge or Judge of the Compensation Court,
          (f) Chief Magistrate, Deputy Chief Magistrate or Magistrate
          of the Local Courts; Chief Magistrate, Deputy Chief
          Magistrate or Magistrate of the Local Court; Senior
          Children’s Magistrate or Children’s Magistrate of the
          Children’s Court; Chief Industrial Magistrate or
          Industrial Magistrate; Chairman, Deputy Chairman or
          Licensing Magistrate of the Licensing Court.
     (2) For the purposes of this Part:
          (a) the Supreme Court, the Industrial Court and the Land
          and Environment Court are taken to be courts of equivalent
          status, and are of higher status than the courts referred
          to in paragraphs (b) and (c), and
          (b) the District Court and the Compensation Court are taken
          to be courts of equivalent status, and are of higher status
          than the court referred to in paragraph (c), and
          (c) the holders of the judicial offices referred to in
          paragraph (f) of the definition of
          >"judicial office" are taken to constitute one court, and
          (d) the relative status of any other court is to be as
          determined by legislation.
     (3) This Part extends to the removal or suspension of judicial
     officers after the commencement of this Part because of matters
     arising before that commencement.
 

CONSTITUTION ACT 1902
- SECT 53
Removal from judicial office
 
 
53 Removal from judicial office
     (1) No holder of a judicial office can be removed from the office,
     except as provided by this Part.
     (2) The holder of a judicial office can be removed from the office by
     the Governor, on an address from both Houses of Parliament in the
     same session, seeking removal on the ground of proved misbehaviour or
     incapacity.
     (3) Legislation may lay down additional procedures and requirements
     to be complied with before a judicial officer may be removed from
     office.
     (4) This section extends to term appointments to a judicial office,
     but does not apply to the holder of the office at the expiry of such
     a term.
     (5) This section extends to acting appointments to a judicial office,
     whether made with or without a specific term.
 

CONSTITUTION ACT 1902
- SECT 54
Suspension from judicial office
 
 
54 Suspension from judicial office
     (1) No holder of a judicial office can be suspended from the office,
     except in accordance with legislation.
     (2) A suspended judicial officer is entitled to be paid remuneration
     as a judicial officer during the period of suspension, at the current
     rate applicable to the office from which he or she is suspended.
 

CONSTITUTION ACT 1902
- SECT 55
Retirement
 
 
55 Retirement
     (1) This Part does not prevent the fixing or a change of age at which
     all judicial officers, or all judicial officers of a court, are
     required to retire by legislation.
     (2) However, such a change does not apply to a judicial officer
     holding office when the change takes effect, unless the judicial
     officer consents.
 

CONSTITUTION ACT 1902
- SECT 56
Abolition of judicial office
 
 
56 Abolition of judicial office
     (1) This Part does not prevent the abolition by legislation of a
     judicial office.
     (2) The person who held an abolished judicial office is entitled
     (without loss of remuneration) to be appointed to and to hold another
     judicial office in the same court or in a court of equivalent or
     higher status, unless already the holder of such an office.
     (3) That right remains operative for the period during which the
     person was entitled to hold the abolished office, subject to removal
     or suspension in accordance with law. The right lapses if the person
     declines appointment to the other office or resigns from it.
     (4) This section applies whether the judicial office was abolished
     directly or whether it was abolished indirectly by the abolition of a
     court or part of a court.
 

CONSTITUTION ACT 1902
- SCHEDULE 6
 
 
SCHEDULE 6 &ndash; Conduct of Legislative Council elections
(Sections 16, 22A)
Part 1 - System of election 1
At a periodic Council election, the whole of the State of New South Wales shall
be a single electoral district for the return of 21 Members of the Legislative
Council.
2
     (1) At a poll for a periodic Council election, a voter shall be
     required to record his vote for 15 candidates and no more but shall
     be permitted to record his vote for as many more candidates as he
     pleases, so as to indicate in such manner as may be provided by law
     the candidates for whom he votes and the order of his preferences for
     them.
     (2) Notwithstanding subclause (1) of this clause, a ballot-paper on
     which the voter has recorded not less than 15 votes is not informal
     by reason only that:
          (a) the same preference (other than his first preference)
          has been recorded on the ballot-paper for more than 1
          candidate, but the ballot-paper shall be treated as if
          those preferences and any subsequent preferences had not
          been recorded on the ballot-paper, or
          (b) there is a break in the order of his preferences, but
          the ballot-paper shall be treated as if any subsequent
          preference had not been recorded on the ballot-paper.
3
For the purpose of a periodic Council election, 2 or more candidates may, in
the manner provided by law, be included in a group in such order as may be
determined by them.
Part 2 - Counting of votes at elections 4
     (1) In this Part of this Schedule:
     >"continuing candidate" means a candidate not already elected or not
     excluded from the count.
     >"Council returning officer" means the person for the time being
     appointed by law to conduct periodic Council elections.
     (2) In relation to any stage of the scrutiny, a reference in this
     Part of this Schedule to the surplus votes of an elected candidate is
     a reference to the number at that stage by which the elected
     candidate’s votes exceed the quota, reduced by the excess, if any,
     of the number at that stage of the elected candidate’s votes on
     which a next available preference for a continuing candidate is not
     indicated over the quota.
5
The method of counting the votes to ascertain the result of a periodic Council
election shall be as provided in this Part of this Schedule.
6
At the close of the poll the Council returning officer shall ascertain the
total number of first preference votes recorded for each candidate on all
ballot-papers not rejected by him as informal and the total of all such votes.
7
The Council returning officer shall then determine a quota by dividing the
total number of first preference votes for all candidates by 22 and by
increasing the quotient so obtained (disregarding any remainder) by 1.
8
Any candidate who has received a number of first preference votes equal to or
greater than the quota so determined shall be elected.
9
Where the number of first preference votes received by a candidate is equal to
the quota, the whole of the ballot-papers containing those votes shall be set
aside as finally dealt with.
10
Unless all vacancies have been filled, the surplus votes of each elected
candidate shall be transferred to the continuing candidates, in proportion to
the voters’ preferences, as follows:
     (a) The Council returning officer shall divide the number of the
     elected candidate’s surplus votes by the number of first preference
     votes (excluding any first preference votes indicated on ballot-
     papers which do not bear a next available preference for a continuing
     candidate) received by him and the resulting fraction shall, for the
     purposes of this clause, be the transfer value of that candidate’s
     surplus votes.
     (b) The Council returning officer shall take all of the ballot-papers
     of the elected candidate on which a next available preference is
     indicated for a continuing candidate and arrange them in separate
     parcels for the continuing candidates according to the next available
     preference indicated on them.
     (c) The Council returning officer shall ascertain, from the parcel
     referred to in paragraph (b) in respect of each continuing candidate,
     the total number of ballot-papers of the elected candidate which bear
     the next available preference for that continuing candidate and
     shall, by multiplying that total by the transfer value of the elected
     candidate’s surplus votes, determine the number of votes to be
     transferred from the elected candidate to each continuing candidate.
     (d) If, as a result of the multiplication, any fraction results, so
     many of those fractions, taken in the order of their magnitude,
     beginning with the largest, as are necessary to ensure that the
     number of votes transferred equals the number of the elected
     candidate’s surplus votes shall be reckoned as of the value of
     unity and the remaining fractions shall be ignored.
     (e) The Council returning officer shall then determine the number of
     ballot-papers to be transferred from the elected candidate to each
     continuing candidate.
     (f) The Council returning officer shall then, in respect of each
     continuing candidate, forthwith take at random, from the parcel
     referred to in paragraph (b) containing the ballot-papers of the
     elected candidate which bear the next available preference for that
     continuing candidate, the number of ballot-papers determined under
     paragraph (e) and transfer those ballot-papers to the continuing
     candidate.
     (g) The ballot-papers containing the first preference votes of the
     elected candidate which have not been transferred (that is, the
     ballot-papers containing the number of votes equal to the quota)
     shall be set aside as finally dealt with.
11
     (1) When the surplus votes of all elected candidates have been
     transferred to the continuing candidates as provided by clause 10,
     any continuing candidate who has received a number of votes equal to
     or greater than the quota shall be elected.
     (2) Unless all the vacancies have been filled, the surplus votes of
     the elected candidate shall be transferred to the continuing
     candidates in accordance with the provisions of clause 10, but, in
     the application of those provisions, only those ballot-papers which
     have been transferred to the elected candidate from a candidate
     previously elected shall be taken into consideration.
12
     (1) If, as a result of the transfer of the surplus votes of a
     candidate elected in pursuance of clause 11 or elected at a later
     stage of the scrutiny, a continuing candidate has received a number
     of votes equal to or greater than the quota, he shall be elected.
     (2) Unless all the vacancies have been filled, the surplus votes of
     the elected candidate shall be transferred to the continuing
     candidates in accordance with the provisions of clause 10, but, in
     the application of those provisions, only those ballot-papers which
     have been transferred to the elected candidate from the candidate or
     candidates elected at the last preceding count shall be taken into
     consideration.
13
The ballot-papers containing the first preference votes of a candidate who has
been elected in pursuance of the provisions of clause 11 or 12, together with
the ballot-papers transferred to him from a candidate previously elected or
excluded which have not been further transferred, shall be set aside as finally
dealt with.
14
     (1) If, after the transfer of the surplus votes of the elected
     candidates, no candidate has, or less than the number of candidates
     required to be elected have, received a number of votes equal to the
     quota, the candidate who has the fewest votes shall be excluded and
     the whole of his ballot-papers shall be transferred to the continuing
     candidates next in order of the voters’ available preferences.
     (2) If thereupon, or as the result of the exclusion of a candidate at
     any subsequent stage of the scrutiny, a continuing candidate has
     received a number of votes equal to or greater than the quota, he
     shall be elected.
     (3) Unless all the vacancies have then been filled, the surplus votes
     of the elected candidate shall be transferred to the continuing
     candidates in accordance with the provisions of clause 10, but, in
     the application of those provisions, only those ballot-papers which
     have been transferred to the elected candidate from the candidate
     last excluded shall be taken into consideration.
     (4) The ballot-papers containing the first preference votes of the
     elected candidate, together with the ballot-papers transferred to him
     from a candidate previously elected or excluded which have not been
     further transferred, shall be set aside as finally dealt with.
     (5) If no continuing candidate has then received a number of votes
     equal to the quota, the process of excluding the candidate with the
     fewest votes and the transferring of ballot-papers containing those
     votes to the continuing candidates shall be repeated until a
     continuing candidate has received a number of votes equal to the
     quota or, in respect of the last vacancy, a majority of the votes
     remaining in the count, but the process of excluding candidates shall
     not be repeated after the number of continuing candidates is equal to
     the number of unfilled vacancies.
     (6) A ballot-paper that under this clause is, pursuant to the
     exclusion of a candidate, required to be transferred to a continuing
     candidate shall be set aside as finally dealt with if it does not
     indicate a next available preference for a continuing candidate.
15
After all the candidates who have received a number of votes equal to the quota
are elected:
     (a) where there is 1 remaining unfilled vacancy—the candidate who
     has received a majority of the votes remaining in the count, or
     (b) where the number of continuing candidates is equal to the number
     of remaining unfilled vacancies—those candidates,
shall be elected.
16
Where, on the count of the first preference votes, or at the same time at any
subsequent stage of the scrutiny, 2 or more candidates are elected by reason of
their having received a number of votes equal to or greater than the quota, any
transfer of the surplus votes of those candidates shall be carried out in the
order, first of the candidate with the largest surplus, second of the candidate
with the next largest surplus and so on.
17
     (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Part of this Schedule,
     a transfer of the surplus votes of an elected candidate shall be
     deferred (but without affecting the order of that transfer) so long
     as the total number of those surplus votes and any other surplus
     votes not transferred is less than the difference between the total
     votes of the 2 continuing candidates with the fewest votes.
     (2) In any such case, unless all vacancies have been filled, the
     candidate with the fewest votes shall be first excluded and the
     ballot-papers containing his votes shall be transferred to the
     continuing candidates as provided in clause 14 (1).
18
     (1) If, on any count, 2 or more candidates have an equal number of
     votes, and 1 of them has to be excluded, the candidate whose name is
     on the slip drawn in accordance with subclause (4) of this clause
     shall be excluded.
     (2) If, at the time of their election, 2 or more candidates have an
     equal number of votes that is more than the quota, the candidate
     whose name is on the slip drawn in accordance with subclause (4) of
     this clause shall, for the purposes of clause 16, be deemed to have
     had the larger or largest surplus.
     (3) If, on the final count for filling the last vacancy, 2 candidates
     have an equal number of votes, 1 candidate shall be excluded in
     accordance with subclause (1) of this clause and the other shall be
     elected.
     (4) For the purposes of subclauses (1) and (2) of this clause, the
     names of the candidates who have an equal number of votes having been
     written on similar slips of paper by the Council returning officer
     and the slips having been folded by him so as to prevent the
     description being seen and having been mixed, 1 of those slips shall
     be drawn at random by him.
 

CONSTITUTION ACT 1902
- SCHEDULE 7
 
 
SCHEDULE 7 &ndash; Conduct of Legislative Assembly elections
(Section 29)
Part 1 - Method of voting 1
At a poll for the election of a Member of the Legislative Assembly, a voter
shall be required to record his vote for 1 candidate and no more but shall be
permitted to record his vote for as many more candidates as he pleases, so as
to indicate in such manner as may be provided by law the candidates for whom he
votes and the order of his preferences for them.
Part 2 - Counting of votes at elections 2
     (1) In this Part of this Schedule:
     >"continuing candidate", in relation to a count, means a candidate
     not excluded at a previous count.
     >"returning officer" means a person for the time being appointed by
     law to conduct an election of a Member of the Legislative Assembly.
     (2) A reference in this Part of this Schedule to an exhausted ballot-
     paper in relation to any count is a reference to a ballot-paper on
     which there is not recorded a vote for a continuing candidate.
     (3) For the purposes of subclause (2) of this clause, where:
          (a) the same preference (other than a first preference) has
          been recorded on a ballot-paper for more than 1 candidate,
          the ballot-paper shall be treated as if those preferences
          and any subsequent preferences had not been recorded on the
          ballot-paper, or
          (b) there is a break in the order of preferences recorded
          on a ballot-paper, the ballot-paper shall be treated as if
          any subsequent preference had not been recorded on the
          ballot-paper.
3
The method of counting the votes to ascertain the result of an election of a
Member of the Legislative Assembly shall be as provided in this Part of this
Schedule.
4
At the close of the poll the returning officer shall ascertain the total number
of first preference votes recorded for each candidate on all ballot-papers not
rejected by him as informal.
5
If a candidate has a majority of the first preference votes, he shall be
elected.
6
If no candidate is elected under clause 5, the returning officer shall make a
second count.
7
     (1) On the second count, the candidate who has the fewest first
     preference votes shall be excluded, and each of his ballot-papers
     that is not exhausted shall be transferred to the candidate next in
     the order of the voter’s preference and counted to him as a vote.
     (2) If, on the second count, a candidate has a majority of the votes
     remaining in the count, he shall be elected.
8
     (1) If, on the second count, no candidate has a majority of the votes
     remaining in the count, the process of excluding the candidate who
     has the fewest votes, transferring each of his ballot-papers that is
     not exhausted to the continuing candidate next in the order of the
     voter’s preference and counting it to him as a vote shall be
     repeated by the returning officer until 1 candidate has a majority of
     the votes remaining in the count.
     (2) The candidate who, in accordance with subclause (1) of this
     clause, has a majority of the votes remaining in the count shall be
     elected.
9
Notwithstanding clause 7 (1) or 8 (1), the process of transferring to a
continuing candidate each of the ballot-papers that is not exhausted and
counting it to him as a vote shall not be repeated where there is only 1
continuing candidate, but that 1 continuing candidate shall be elected.
10
     (1) Where, on any count at which the candidate with the fewest number
     of votes has to be excluded, 2 or more candidates have an equal
     number of votes (that number being fewer than the number of votes
     that any other candidate has or those candidates being the only
     continuing candidates):
          (a) such one of those candidates as had the fewest number
          of votes at the last count at which they did not have an
          equal number of votes shall be excluded, or
          (b) if they had an equal number of votes at all preceding
          counts, the candidate whose name is on a slip drawn in
          accordance with subclause (2) of this clause shall be
          excluded.
     (2) For the purposes of subclause (1) of this clause, the names of
     the candidates who have an equal number of votes having been written
     on similar slips of paper by the returning officer and the slips
     having been folded by him so as to prevent the names being seen and
     having been mixed, 1 of those slips shall be drawn at random by him.
 

CONSTITUTION ACT 1902
- NOTES
 

Does not include amendments by:
Constitution Amendment
(Governor’s Salary) Act 2003 No 66 (not commenced — to commence on the day
on which the first person to be appointed to the office of Governor after the
date of assent to that Act is so appointed)




 

CONSTITUTION ACT 1902
- NOTES
 

See also:
Government Sector Employment Legislation Amendment Bill
2013




 

CONSTITUTION ACT 1902
- NOTES
 

Reprint history (since 1972):
Reprint No 1   9 June 1972  

Reprint No 2   21 April 1976  

Reprint No 3   23 August 1978  

Reprint No 4   28 August 1980  

Reprint No 5   27 January 1983  

Reprint No 6   14 October 1985  

Reprint No 7   23 December 1987  

Reprint No 8   2 April 1991  

Reprint No 9   5 August 1991  

Reprint No 10   15 February 1993  

Reprint No 11   14 November 1995  

Reprint No 12   5 January 1999  

Reprint No 13   16 January 2001  

Reprint No 14   13 June 2006  

Reprint No 15   7 December 2010  




 

CONSTITUTION ACT 1902
- NOTES
 

Historical notes
The following abbreviations are used in the Historical notes:

 ______________________________________________________________________
|______________________________________________________________________|
|______________________________________________________________________|
|______________________________________________________________________|
|______________________________________________________________________|
|______________________________________________________________________|
|______________________________________________________________________|
|______________________________________________________________________|
See also Australia Act 1986 (Commonwealth); Australia Act
1986 (UK); Parliamentary Electorates and
Elections Act 1912; and Women’s Legal Status Act
1918. Table of amending instrumentsConstitution Act 1902 No
32. Assented to 18.8.1902. This Act has been amended as follows:

 _____________________________________________________________________________
|    |      |Parliamentary Elections Act                                      |
|1906|No 41 |1906. Reserved 19.12.1906. Assented to 26.3.1907. See GG No 59 of|
|_____________________________________________________________________________|
|1908|No 2  |Ministers’ Salaries Act                                        |
|_____________________________________________________________________________|
|1912|No 19 |Parliamentary Representatives                                    |
|_____________________________________________________________________________|
|    |No 41 |Parliamentary                                                    |
|_____________________________________________________________________________|
|    |      |Parliamentary Representatives Allowance and Ministers’         |
|1920|No 20 |Salaries (Amendment) Act 1920. Assented to 21.12.1920.           |
|    |      |                                                                 |
|_____________________________________________________________________________|
|    |      |Parliamentary Allowances and Salaries Act 1922. Assented to      |
|1922|No 2  |6.5.1922.                                                        |
|    |      |                                                                 |
|_____________________________________________________________________________|
|    |      |Parliamentary Allowances and Salaries Act 1925. Assented to      |
|1925|No 6  |21.10.1925.                                                      |
|    |      |                                                                 |
|_____________________________________________________________________________|
|1926|No 1  |Constitution (Amendment) Act                                     |
|_____________________________________________________________________________|
|    |      |Audit (Amendment) Act 1929. Assented to 8.4.1929.                |
|1929|No 12 |                                                                 |
|_____________________________________________________________________________|
|    |      |Constitution (Legislative Council) Amendment Act                 |
|    |      |1929. Reserved 26.3.1929. Assented to 5.11.1929. See GG No 143 of|
|    |No 28 |24.9.1930, p 3775.                                               |
|    |      |                                                                 |
|    |      |Date of commencement, 1.10.1930, sec 1 and GG No 144 of          |
|_____________________________________________________________________________|
|    |      |Parliamentary Allowances and Salaries Act 1930. Assented to      |
|1930|No 8  |15.4.1930.                                                       |
|    |      |                                                                 |
|_____________________________________________________________________________|
|    |      |Parliamentary Allowances and Salaries Act 1932. Assented to      |
|1932|No 48 |21.12.1932.                                                      |
|    |      |                                                                 |
|_____________________________________________________________________________|
|    |      |Constitution Amendment (Legislative Council) Act                 |
|    |      |1932. Approved by the electors in accordance with sec 7A of Act  |
|    |      |No 32, 1902, on 13.5.1933. Assented to 22.6.1933.                |
|1933|No 2  |                                                                 |
|    |      |Date of commencement of sec 4, 23.4.1934, secs 2, 4 (1) and GG No|
|    |      |71 of 16.4.1934, p 1627; date of commencement of sec 5,          |
|_____________________________________________________________________________|
|1936|No 1  |Constitution (Amendment) Act                                     |
|_____________________________________________________________________________|
|    |      |Demise of the Crown (Amendment) Act 1936. Assented to 11.12.1936.|
|    |No 55 |                                                                 |
|_____________________________________________________________________________|
|    |      |Parliamentary Allowances and Salaries Act 1938. Assented to      |
|1938|No 18 |31.10.1938.                                                      |
|    |      |                                                                 |
|_____________________________________________________________________________|
|    |      |Parliamentary Allowances and Salaries Act 1947. Assented to      |
|    |      |9.12.1947.                                                       |
|1947|No 28 |                                                                 |
|    |      |Date of commencement (sec 2 (3) (a) excepted), 1.7.1947, sec 1   |
|    |      |(3); date of commencement of sec 2 (3) (a), 30.10.1947, sec 2 (3)|
|_____________________________________________________________________________|
|    |      |Constitution Amendment (Legislative Council Members Allowances)  |
|    |      |Act 1948. Assented to 2.12.1948.                                 |
|1948|No 34 |                                                                 |
|    |      |Date of commencement, 1.9.1948, sec 1 (2). (Act repealed by Act  |
|_____________________________________________________________________________|
|    |      |Constitution Amendment                                           |
|1950|No 33 |(Legislative Assembly) Act 1950. Reserved 2.11.1950. Assented to |
|_____________________________________________________________________________|
|    |      |Parliamentary Allowances and Salaries Act 1951. Assented to      |
|1951|No 63 |28.12.1951.                                                      |
|    |      |                                                                 |
|_____________________________________________________________________________|
|    |      |Parliamentary Allowances and Salaries Act 1956. Assented to      |
|1956|No 22 |12.10.1956.                                                      |
|    |      |                                                                 |
|_____________________________________________________________________________|
|    |      |Parliamentary Allowances and Salaries Act 1959. Assented to      |
|1959|No 36 |10.12.1959.                                                      |
|    |      |                                                                 |
|_____________________________________________________________________________|
|    |      |Constitution (Amendment) Act                                     |
|1962|No 39 |1962. Reserved 14.12.1962. Assented to 17.1.1963. See GG No 37 of|
|_____________________________________________________________________________|
|    |      |Parliamentary Allowances and Salaries (Amendment) Act            |
|1963|No 36 |1963. Assented to 10.10.1963.                                    |
|    |      |                                                                 |
|_____________________________________________________________________________|
|    |      |Decimal Currency Act                                             |
|    |      |1965. Assented to 20.12.1965.                                    |
|1965|No 33 |                                                                 |
|    |      |Date of commencement of sec 4, 14.2.1966, secs 1 (3), 2 (1) and  |
|    |      |the Currency Act                                                 |
|_____________________________________________________________________________|
|    |      |Parliamentary Allowances and Salaries (Amendment) Act            |
|1966|No 29 |1966. Assented to 13.4.1966.                                     |
|    |      |                                                                 |
|_____________________________________________________________________________|
|1968|No 60 |Constitution (Amendment) Act                                     |
|_____________________________________________________________________________|
|    |      |Parliamentary Allowances and Salaries (Amendment) Act            |
|1969|No 41 |1969. Assented to 17.4.1969.                                     |
|    |      |                                                                 |
|_____________________________________________________________________________|
|    |      |Parliamentary Allowances and Salaries (Amendment) Act            |
|1971|No 52 |1971. Assented to 14.12.1971.                                    |
|    |      |                                                                 |
|_____________________________________________________________________________|
|1972|No 48 |Reprints Act                                                     |
|_____________________________________________________________________________|
|    |      |Parliamentary Allowances and Salaries (Amendment) Act            |
|1974|No 7  |1974. Assented to 26.3.1974.                                     |
|    |      |                                                                 |
|_____________________________________________________________________________|
|    |      |Parliamentary Allowances and Salaries (Amendment) Act            |
|    |      |1975. Assented to 1.4.1975.                                      |
|1975|No 2  |                                                                 |
|    |      |Date of commencement of sec 3 (sec 3 (b) (ii) excepted),         |
|    |      |1.1.1975, sec 2; date of commencement of sec 3 (b) (ii),         |
|_____________________________________________________________________________|
|    |      |Parliamentary Remuneration Tribunal Act 1975. Assented to        |
|    |No 25 |14.4.1975.                                                       |
|    |      |                                                                 |
|_____________________________________________________________________________|
|    |      |Constitution and Other Acts                                      |
|    |No 67 |(Amendment) Act 1975. Assented to 31.10.1975. (Sec 8 repealed by |
|    |      |Act No 25, 1975, Sch 2 (as amended by Act No 67, 1975, sec 9     |
|_____________________________________________________________________________|
|    |      |Constitution (Ministers of the Crown) Amendment Act              |
|1976|No 48 |1976. Assented to 27.10.1976.                                    |
|    |      |                                                                 |
|_____________________________________________________________________________|
|    |      |Constitution (Amendment) Act                                     |
|1978|No 46 |1978. Reserved 3.4.1978. Assented to 25.7.1978. See GG No 89 of  |
|_____________________________________________________________________________|
|    |      |Constitution and Parliamentary                                   |
|    |No 75 |Electorates and Elections (Amendment) Act 1978. Assented to      |
|_____________________________________________________________________________|
|1979|No 38 |Constitution (Amendment) Act                                     |
|_____________________________________________________________________________|
|    |      |Constitution (Public Service) Amendment Act                      |
|    |      |1979. Assented to 16.5.1979.                                     |
|    |No 91 |                                                                 |
|    |      |Date of commencement of sec 3, 28.9.1979, sec 2 (2) and GG No 130|
|_____________________________________________________________________________|
|    |      |Constitution (Amendment) Act 1980. Assented to 15.4.1980.        |
|1980|No 13 |                                                                 |
|    |      |Date of commencement of Sch 1, 5.8.1980, sec 2 (2) and GG No 102 |
|_____________________________________________________________________________|
|    |      |Constitution (Legislative                                        |
|1981|No 102|Assembly) Amendment Act 1981. Reserved 12.11.1981. Assented to   |
|_____________________________________________________________________________|
|    |      |Constitution (Disclosures by                                     |
|    |No 103|Members) Amendment Act 1981. Reserved 12.11.1981. Assented to    |
|_____________________________________________________________________________|
|    |      |Constitution (Consolidated Fund) Amendment Act                   |
|1982|No 95 |1982. Assented to 6.9.1982.                                      |
|    |      |                                                                 |
|_____________________________________________________________________________|
|    |      |Miscellaneous Acts (Public Finance and Audit) Repeal and         |
|    |      |Amendment Act 1983. Assented to 29.12.1983.                      |
|1983|No 153|                                                                 |
|    |      |Date of commencement of Sch 1, 6.1.1984, sec 2 (2) and GG No 4 of|
|_____________________________________________________________________________|
|    |      |Constitution (Enrolment of Acts) Amendment Act                   |
|    |      |1984. Assented to 6.6.1984.                                      |
|1984|No 21 |                                                                 |
|    |      |Date of commencement of Sch 1, 1.3.1985, sec 2 (2) and GG No 178 |
|_____________________________________________________________________________|
|    |No 153|Statute Law (Miscellaneous                                       |
|_____________________________________________________________________________|
|1986|No 16 |Statute Law (Miscellaneous                                       |
|_____________________________________________________________________________|
|    |No 57 |Constitution (Amendment) Act                                     |
|_____________________________________________________________________________|
|    |No 111|Constitution (Local Government)                                  |
|_____________________________________________________________________________|
|    |      |Statute Law (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act (No 1)                |
|    |      |1987. Assented to 28.5.1987.                                     |
|1987|No 48 |                                                                 |
|    |      |Date of commencement of Sch 32, except as provided by sec 2 (13),|
|_____________________________________________________________________________|
|    |No 64 |Constitution (Amendment) Act                                     |
|_____________________________________________________________________________|
|    |      |Constitution (Parliamentary Secretaries) Amendment Act           |
|1988|No 2  |1988. Assented to 10.6.1988.                                     |
|    |      |                                                                 |
|_____________________________________________________________________________|
|    |      |Constitution (Governor’s Salary) Amendment Act                 |
|    |No 52 |1988. Assented to 26.10.1988.                                    |
|    |      |                                                                 |
|_____________________________________________________________________________|
|    |      |Constitution (Legislative Assembly) Amendment Act                |
|1990|No 17 |1990. Assented to 14.6.1990.                                     |
|    |      |                                                                 |
|_____________________________________________________________________________|
|    |      |Constitution and Parliamentary Electorates and Elections         |
|    |      |(Amendment) Act 1990. Assented to 18.12.1990.                    |
|    |No 111|                                                                 |
|    |      |Date of commencement, 29.3.1991, sec 2 and GG No 52 of 28.3.1991,|
|_____________________________________________________________________________|
|    |      |Statute Law (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1991. Assented to     |
|    |      |3.5.1991.                                                        |
|1991|No 17 |                                                                 |
|    |      |Date of commencement of the provisions of Sch 1 relating to the  |
|_____________________________________________________________________________|
|    |      |Constitution (Legislative Council) Amendment Act                 |
|    |No 20 |1991. Assented to 1.7.1991.                                      |
|    |      |                                                                 |
|_____________________________________________________________________________|
|    |      |Constitution (Legislative Council) Further Amendment Act         |
|    |No 61 |1991. Assented to 13.12.1991.                                    |
|    |      |                                                                 |
|_____________________________________________________________________________|
|    |      |Constitution (Amendment) Act 1992. Assented to 8.12.1992.        |
|1992|No 106|                                                                 |
|_____________________________________________________________________________|
|    |      |Constitution (Fixed Term Parliaments) Amendment Act              |
|1995|No 1  |1993. Assented to 2.5.1995.                                      |
|    |      |                                                                 |
|_____________________________________________________________________________|
|    |      |Constitution (Entrenchment) Amendment Act 1992. Assented to      |
|    |No 2  |2.5.1995.                                                        |
|    |      |                                                                 |
|_____________________________________________________________________________|
|    |      |Public Sector Management Amendment Act 1995. Assented to         |
|    |      |25.9.1995.                                                       |
|    |      |                                                                 |
|    |      |Date of commencement, 13.10.1995, sec 2. Amended by Statute Law  |
|    |No 36 |(Miscellaneous                                                   |
|    |      |Provisions) Act (No 2) 1995 No 99. Assented to 21.12.1995. Date  |
|    |      |of commencement of the provision of Sch 2 relating to the Public |
|    |      |Sector Management Amendment                                      |
|_____________________________________________________________________________|
|    |      |Industrial Relations Act                                         |
|    |      |1996. Assented to 13.6.1996.                                     |
|1996|No 17 |                                                                 |
|    |      |Date of commencement of the provision of Sch 5 relating to the   |
|    |      |Constitution Act 1902, 2.9.1996, sec 2 and GG No 99 of 30.8.1996,|
|_____________________________________________________________________________|
|    |      |Constitution and Parliamentary Electorates and Elections         |
|1997|No 88 |Amendment Act 1997. Assented to 23.10.1997.                      |
|    |      |                                                                 |
|_____________________________________________________________________________|
|    |      |Statute Law (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act (No 2)                |
|1998|No 120|1998. Assented to 26.11.1998.                                    |
|    |      |                                                                 |
|_____________________________________________________________________________|
|    |      |Statute Law (Miscellaneous Provisions)                           |
|1999|No 31 |Act 1999. Assented to 7.7.1999.                                  |
|    |      |                                                                 |
|_____________________________________________________________________________|
|    |      |Crimes Legislation Amendment (Sentencing) Act                    |
|    |      |1999. Assented to 8.12.1999.                                     |
|    |No 94 |                                                                 |
|    |      |Date of commencement of Sch 4.90, 1.1.2000, sec 2 (1) and GG No  |
|_____________________________________________________________________________|
|    |      |Constitution Amendment Act                                       |
|2000|No 30 |2000. Assented to 9.6.2000.                                      |
|    |      |                                                                 |
|_____________________________________________________________________________|
|    |      |Courts Legislation Amendment Act                                 |
|2005|No 31 |2005. Assented to 15.6.2005.                                     |
|    |      |                                                                 |
|_____________________________________________________________________________|
|    |      |Constitution Amendment (Pledge of                                |
|2006|No 6  |Loyalty) Act 2006. Assented to 3.4.2006.                         |
|    |      |                                                                 |
|_____________________________________________________________________________|
|    |      |Constitution Amendment (Governor) Act                            |
|    |No 32 |2006. Assented to 31.5.2006.                                     |
|    |      |                                                                 |
|_____________________________________________________________________________|
|    |      |Statute Law (Miscellaneous Provisions)                           |
|2007|No 27 |Act 2007. Assented to 4.7.2007.                                  |
|    |      |                                                                 |
|_____________________________________________________________________________|
|    |      |Constitution Amendment (Speaker) Act                             |
|    |No 31 |2007. Assented to 4.7.2007.                                      |
|    |      |                                                                 |
|_____________________________________________________________________________|
|    |      |Miscellaneous Acts (Local Court)                                 |
|    |      |Amendment Act 2007. Assented to 13.12.2007.                      |
|    |No 94 |                                                                 |
|    |      |Date of commencement of Sch 1.15, 6.7.2009, sec 2 and 2009 (314) |
|_____________________________________________________________________________|
|    |      |Statute Law (Miscellaneous                                       |
|2008|No 114|Provisions) Act (No 2) 2008. Assented to 10.12.2008.             |
|    |      |                                                                 |
|_____________________________________________________________________________|
|    |      |Children Legislation Amendment (Wood                             |
|    |      |Inquiry Recommendations) Act 2009. Assented to 7.4.2009.         |
|2009|No 13 |                                                                 |
|    |      |Date of commencement of Sch 2.3, 1.6.2009, sec 2 and 2009 (178)  |
|_____________________________________________________________________________|
|    |      |Parliamentary Remuneration Amendment                             |
|    |No 62 |(Salary Packaging) Act 2009. Assented to 16.9.2009.              |
|    |      |                                                                 |
|_____________________________________________________________________________|
|    |      |Constitution Amendment                                           |
|    |No 83 |(Lieutenant-Governor) Act 2009. Assented to 19.11.2009.          |
|    |      |                                                                 |
|_____________________________________________________________________________|
|    |      |Constitution Amendment (Recognition of                           |
|2010|No 75 |Aboriginal People) Act 2010. Assented to 25.10.2010.             |
|    |      |                                                                 |
|_____________________________________________________________________________|
|    |      |Constitution Amendment (Prorogation of                           |
|2011|No 3  |Parliament) Act 2011. Assented to 16.5.2011.                     |
|    |      |                                                                 |
|_____________________________________________________________________________|
|    |      |Constitution Amendment (Restoration of                           |
|2012|No 33 |Oaths of Allegiance) Act 2012. Assented to 5.6.2012.             |
|    |      |                                                                 |
|_____________________________________________________________________________|
|    |      |Government Sector Employment Act                                 |
|    |      |2013. Assented to 25.6.2013.                                     |
|2013|No 40 |                                                                 |
|    |      |Date of commencement of Sch 6.2, 24.2.2014, sec 2 and 2013 (631) |
|_____________________________________________________________________________|
This Act has also been amended:
     (a) by proclamations under sec 28A, and

     (b) pursuant to an order under secs 8 (2) and 9 (3) of the Reprints
     Act 1972 No 48 (formerly Acts Reprinting Act 1972). Order dated
     12.4.1976, and published in Gazette No 54 of 15.4.1976, p 1706,
     declaring that the Constitution Act 1902, sec 24A excepted, is an
     enactment to which sec 8 (2) and sec 9 (3) of the Acts Reprinting Act

     1972 apply.
Table of amendmentsNo reference is made to certain amendments made by the
Decimal Currency Act 1965 and the Reprints Act 1972.

 _____________________________________________________________________________
|                      |Am 1975 No 67, sec 7 (a); 1978 No 75, Sch 1 (1); 1979 |
|Sec 1                 |No 91, sec 3 (a); 1982 No 95, Sch 1 (1); 1984 No 21,  |
|_____________________________________________________________________________|
|_____________________________________________________________________________|
|_____________________________________________________________________________|
|_____________________________________________________________________________|
|_____________________________________________________________________________|
|_____________________________________________________________________________|
|_____________________________________________________________________________|
|                      |Am 1978 No 46, sec 2; 1978 No 75, Sch 1 (4) (a); 1979 |
|                      |No 38, Sch 1 (2).                                     |
|Sec 7                 |     Note: See also Constitution and                  |
|                      |     Parliamentary Electorates and Elections          |
|                      |     (Amendment) Act 1978, sec 3 (2) and Sch 1        |
|_____________________________________________________________________________|
|                      |Ins 1929 No 28, sec 2. Am 1933 No 2, secs 3 (2), 5    |
|Sec 7A                |(4); 1978 No 75, Sch 1 (5); 1981 No 103, Sch 1 (1);   |
|_____________________________________________________________________________|
|Sec 7B                |Ins 1979 No 38, Sch 1 (3). Am 1981 No 102, Sch 1 (1); |
|_____________________________________________________________________________|
|_____________________________________________________________________________|
|_____________________________________________________________________________|
|_____________________________________________________________________________|
|_____________________________________________________________________________|
|_____________________________________________________________________________|
|Sec 9B                |Ins 1987 No 64, Sch 1 (3). Am 2006 No 32, Sch 1 [2]   |
|_____________________________________________________________________________|
|Sec 9C                |Ins 1987 No 64, Sch 1 (3). Am 2006 No 32, Sch 1 [4]–|
|_____________________________________________________________________________|
|Sec 9D                |Ins 1987 No 64, Sch 1 (3). Am 2006 No 32, Sch 1 [7]   |
|_____________________________________________________________________________|
|_____________________________________________________________________________|
|_____________________________________________________________________________|
|_____________________________________________________________________________|
|_____________________________________________________________________________|
|_____________________________________________________________________________|
|_____________________________________________________________________________|
|Sec 12                |Am 1936 No 55, sec 2 (b); 1984 No 153, Sch 16. Subst  |
|_____________________________________________________________________________|
|Sec 13                |Am 1933 No 2, sec 4 (4); 1962 No 39, sec 2 (a); 1980  |
|_____________________________________________________________________________|
|Sec 13A               |Ins 1978 No 75, Sch 1 (7). Am 1999 No 94, Sch 4.90;   |
|_____________________________________________________________________________|
|Sec 13B               |Ins 1978 No 75, Sch 1 (7). Am 1980 No 13, Sch 1 (2);  |
|_____________________________________________________________________________|
|_____________________________________________________________________________|
|Sec 14                |Am 1933 No 2, sec 4 (5); 1978 No 75, Sch 1 (8); 1980  |
|_____________________________________________________________________________|
|_____________________________________________________________________________|
|_____________________________________________________________________________|
|_____________________________________________________________________________|
|Sec 16                |Am 1926 No 1, sec 2. Rep 1933 No 2, sec 4 (2). Ins    |
|_____________________________________________________________________________|
|Sec 17                |Rep 1933 No 2, sec 4 (2). Ins 1978 No 75, Sch 1 (9).  |
|_____________________________________________________________________________|
|_____________________________________________________________________________|
|_____________________________________________________________________________|
|                      |Ins 1948 No 34, sec 2. Am 1951 No 63, sec 2 (a); 1956 |
|                      |No 22, sec 2 (1); 1963 No 36, sec 2 (a); 1966 No 29,  |
|Sec 17G               |sec 2 (a); 1969 No 41, sec 2 (a); 1971 No 52, sec 2   |
|                      |(a); 1974 No 7, sec 3 (a); 1975 No 2, sec 3 (a). Rep  |
|_____________________________________________________________________________|
|Sec 17H               |Ins 1948 No 34, sec 2. Am 1966 No 29, sec 2 (b); 1968 |
|_____________________________________________________________________________|
|Sec 18                |Subst 1978 No 75, Sch 1 (9). Rep 1991 No 20, Sch 1    |
|_____________________________________________________________________________|
|Sec 19                |Am 1962 No 39, sec 2 (b). Subst 1978 No 75, Sch 1 (9).|
|_____________________________________________________________________________|
|Sec 20                |Subst 1933 No 2, sec 4 (6); 1978 No 75, Sch 1 (9). Rep|
|_____________________________________________________________________________|
|Sec 21                |Subst 1933 No 2, sec 4 (7); 1978 No 75, Sch 1 (9). Rep|
|_____________________________________________________________________________|
|_____________________________________________________________________________|
|_____________________________________________________________________________|
|_____________________________________________________________________________|
|_____________________________________________________________________________|
|_____________________________________________________________________________|
|_____________________________________________________________________________|
|                      |Ins 1978 No 75, Sch 1 (9). Am 1991 No 20, Sch 1 (8);  |
|Sec 22G               |1991 No 61, Sch 1 (1); 1992 No 106, Sch 1 (1); 2007 No|
|_____________________________________________________________________________|
|Sec 22H               |Ins 1978 No 75, Sch 1 (9). Subst 1991 No 61, Sch 1    |
|_____________________________________________________________________________|
|_____________________________________________________________________________|
|_____________________________________________________________________________|
|_____________________________________________________________________________|
|Sec 24A               |Ins 1950 No 33, sec 2. Rep 1981 No 102, Sch 1 (3). Ins|
|_____________________________________________________________________________|
|_____________________________________________________________________________|
|                      |Rep 1978 No 75, Sch 1 (10). Ins 1979 No 38, Sch 1 (5).|
|Sec 25                |Am 1986 No 57, sec 2 (1)–(3); 1990 No 17, Sch 1;    |
|_____________________________________________________________________________|
|Sec 26                |Am 1975 No 67, sec 7 (b). Rep 1978 No 75, Sch 1 (11). |
|_____________________________________________________________________________|
|                      |Am 1906 No 41, sec 60; 1912 No 41, sec 187; 1975 No   |
|Sec 27                |67, sec 7 (c). Rep 1978 No 75, Sch 1 (12). Ins 1979 No|
|_____________________________________________________________________________|
|                      |Am 1906 No 41, sec 61; 1912 No 19, sec 2; 1912 No 41, |
|                      |sec 188; 1920 No 20, sec 2; 1922 No 2, sec 2; 1925 No |
|                      |6, sec 2; 1930 No 8, sec 2; 1932 No 48, sec 3; 1938 No|
|                      |18, sec 2; 1947 No 28, sec 2 (1); 1951 No 63, sec 2   |
|Sec 28                |(b); 1956 No 22, sec 3 (a); 1959 No 36, sec 2 (a);    |
|                      |1963 No 36, sec 2 (b); 1966 No 29, sec 2 (c); 1969 No |
|                      |41, sec 2 (b); 1971 No 52, sec 2 (b); 1974 No 7, sec 3|
|                      |(b); 1975 No 2, sec 3 (b). Rep 1975 No 25, sec 15 (2) |
|_____________________________________________________________________________|
|                      |Ins 1956 No 22, sec 3 (b). Am 1971 No 52, sec 2 (c).  |
|Sec 28A               |Rep 1975 No 25, sec 15 (2) (a). Ins 1990 No 111, sec  |
|_____________________________________________________________________________|
|                      |Am 1956 No 22, sec 3 (c); 1966 No 29, sec 2 (d); 1968 |
|Sec 29                |No 60, sec 2 (b); 1975 No 25, sec 15 (2) (b)–(e);   |
|                      |1975 No 67, sec 7 (d). Rep 1978 No 75, Sch 1 (13). Ins|
|_____________________________________________________________________________|
|Sec 31                |Am 1978 No 75, Sch 1 (14); 1992 No 106, Sch 1 (2);    |
|_____________________________________________________________________________|
|_____________________________________________________________________________|
|_____________________________________________________________________________|
|_____________________________________________________________________________|
|_____________________________________________________________________________|
|_____________________________________________________________________________|
|_____________________________________________________________________________|
|_____________________________________________________________________________|
|_____________________________________________________________________________|
|_____________________________________________________________________________|
|_____________________________________________________________________________|
|Sec 35CA              |Ins 2006 No 6, Sch 1 [2]. Am 2012 No 33, Sch 1 [3]– |
|_____________________________________________________________________________|
|_____________________________________________________________________________|
|_____________________________________________________________________________|
|_____________________________________________________________________________|
|_____________________________________________________________________________|
|_____________________________________________________________________________|
|Sec 36                |Subst 1975 No 67, sec 4 (b). Am 1987 No 64, Sch 1 (8) |
|_____________________________________________________________________________|
|Sec 37                |Subst 1975 No 67, sec 4 (b). Am 1987 No 64, Sch 1 (8) |
|_____________________________________________________________________________|
|Sec 37A               |Ins 1975 No 67, sec 4 (b). Am 1987 No 64, Sch 1 (8)   |
|_____________________________________________________________________________|
|Sec 38                |Subst 1975 No 67, sec 4 (b). Am 1987 No 64, Sch 1 (8) |
|_____________________________________________________________________________|
|Sec 38A               |Ins 1933 No 2, sec 5 (3). Am 1987 No 64, Sch 1 (8)    |
|_____________________________________________________________________________|
|_____________________________________________________________________________|
|_____________________________________________________________________________|
|_____________________________________________________________________________|
|_____________________________________________________________________________|
|_____________________________________________________________________________|
|_____________________________________________________________________________|
|_____________________________________________________________________________|
|_____________________________________________________________________________|
|                      |Am 1908 No 2, sec 2 (1); 1920 No 20, sec 3; 1922 No 2,|
|Sec 41                |sec 3; 1925 No 6, sec 3 (a); 1929 No 12, sec 3 (a);   |
|                      |1930 No 8, sec 3 (a); 1932 No 48, sec 4 (a); 1938 No  |
|_____________________________________________________________________________|
|_____________________________________________________________________________|
|_____________________________________________________________________________|
|_____________________________________________________________________________|
|_____________________________________________________________________________|
|_____________________________________________________________________________|
|Sec 47                |Am 1998 No 120, Sch 1.7. Subst 2013 No 40, Sch 6.2    |
|_____________________________________________________________________________|
|_____________________________________________________________________________|
|Sec 48                |Ins 1979 No 91, sec 3 (c). Am 1987 No 64, Sch 1 (9);  |
|_____________________________________________________________________________|
|_____________________________________________________________________________|
|_____________________________________________________________________________|
|Part 7                |Ins 1984 No 21, Sch 1 (2). Subst 2013 No 40, Sch 6.2  |
|_____________________________________________________________________________|
|Sec 50                |Ins 1984 No 21, Sch 1 (2). Rep 2013 No 40, Sch 6.2    |
|_____________________________________________________________________________|
|_____________________________________________________________________________|
|_____________________________________________________________________________|
|_____________________________________________________________________________|
|                      |Ins 1992 No 106, Sch 1 (4). Am 1996 No 17, Sch 5; 2005|
|Sec 52                |No 31, Sch 3; 2007 No 94, Sch 1.15; 2009 No 13, Sch   |
|_____________________________________________________________________________|
|_____________________________________________________________________________|
|_____________________________________________________________________________|
|                      |Am 1908 No 2, sec 4; 1920 No 20, sec 4. Subst 1947 No |
|Second Sch            |28, sec 2 (3) (a); 1951 No 63, sec 2 (c). Am 1968 No  |
|                      |60, sec 2 (c); 1976 No 48, sec 3. Rep 1987 No 64, Sch |
|_____________________________________________________________________________|
|                      |Am 1908 No 2, sec 2 (2); 1920 No 20, sec 5; 1922 No 2,|
|Third Sch             |sec 4; 1925 No 6, sec 3 (b) (c); 1929 No 12, sec 3    |
|                      |(b); 1930 No 8, sec 3 (b) (c); 1932 No 48, sec 4 (b)  |
|_____________________________________________________________________________|
|_____________________________________________________________________________|
|                      |Ins 1956 No 22, sec 3 (d). Am GG No 54 of 8.5.1959, p |
|                      |1438; 1959 No 36, sec 2 (b); GG No 29 of 30.3.1962, p |
|                      |844; GG No 35 of 13.4.1962, p 1018. Subst 1963 No 36, |
|                      |sec 2 (c); 1966 No 29, sec 2 (e). Am GG No 26 of      |
|Fifth Sch             |28.2.1968, p 797; 1969 No 41, sec 2 (c); GG No 23 of  |
|                      |3.3.1971, p 635; 1971 No 52, sec 2 (d); GG No 147 of  |
|                      |30.11.1973, p 5098; 1974 No 7, sec 3 (c); 1975 No 2,  |
|                      |sec 3 (c). Rep 1975 No 25, sec 15 (2) (a). Ins 1978 No|
|_____________________________________________________________________________|
|_____________________________________________________________________________|
|_____________________________________________________________________________|


